2 A 7-Year-Old Girl from Peru With a Chronic Skin Ulcer DALILA MARTÍNEZ, KRISTIEN VERDONCK, MARLEEN BOELAERT AND ALEJANDRO LLANOS-CUENTAS Clinical Presentation Discussion History A 7-year-old Peruvian girl presents with a painless ulcerative skin lesion on her nose, which has been present for the past A 7-year-old girl who lives in the Peruvian capital, Lima, is 4 months. There are no systemic symptoms. brought to a local clinic because of a chronic skin lesion on her nose. The lesion appeared 4 months ago as a small nodule Answer to Question 1 and slowly turned into an ulcer. It is a bit itchy but not pain- What Are Your Differential Diagnoses? ful. There is no history of trauma. The girl is otherwise Infectious diseases that can cause similar lesions in the face healthy. Six months ago, she travelled to a valley on the are cutaneous leishmaniasis, sporotrichosis, cutaneous tuberwestern slopes of the Andes. culosis and infection by Balamuthia mandrillaris, a free-living amoeba. Clinical Findings Although common bacterial infections of the skin that are partially treated or masked as a consequence of traditional The lesion is a localized ulcer on the nose ( remedies (e. g. chemical burns) are another possibility; this ders of the ulcer are indurated and there is a plaque-like infilis less likely in our case given the chronic nature of the lesion. tration of the surrounding skin. The whole lesion is about Cutaneous anthrax and tularaemia could be considered in 2 cm in diameter. There are no palpable lymph nodes. She the differential diagnosis of lesions located on the extremities, is afebrile and the rest of the physical examination is normal. but the latter is endemic in the Northern hemisphere only, Questions and the long duration without any further symptoms does not fit with either infection. In addtion, cutaneous anthrax 1. What are your differential diagnoses? tends to present with considerable localized oedema not seen 2. How would you approach this patient? in this case. Cutaneous leishmaniasis is a common, vector-borne, parasitic disease that affects people living in or travelling to endemic areas. It typically begins as a small papule on airexposed parts of the skin, progresses to a nodule or plaque and then turns into an ulcer with raised borders. The ulcer is painless unless there is bacterial superinfection. Patients may have several lesions. Sporotrichosis is caused by Sporothrix schenckii, a dimorphic fungus that is found in soil and on plants. It enters the skin through direct inoculation (e. g. thorny plants or animal scratch). The disease usually starts with a papule that turns into a tender ulcer. Lesions can spread along draining lymphatic vessels. Sporotrichosis occurs throughout the world as a sporadic disease of farmers and gardeners. This disease is hyperendemic in parts of the Peruvian Andes, where it often affects children and typically produces facial lesions. 4 --- PAGE BREAK -- However, our patient did not travel to such a hyper- obtained by scraping was negative. The leishmanin skin test endemic place. was positive. PCR was also positive; and the infecting species Cutaneous tuberculosis is an uncommon manifestation of was identified as Leishmania (Viannia) peruviana. tuberculosis. It occurs by direct inoculation of mycobacteria With a definitive diagnosis of cutaneous leishmaniasis, into the skin of non-sensitized individuals (e. g. children) or treatment was started with intravenous sodium stiboglucoas a result of reactivation in persons with previous immunity nate (SSG, 20 mg/kg/day for 20 days) which is the first-line against mycobacteria. As our patient lives in a poor neighbour- treatment of choice for cutaneous leishmaniasis caused by hood with a high incidence of tuberculosis, we cannot rule out L. (V.) braziliensis or L. (V.) peruviana in Peru. In addition, this diagnosis. Not only Mycobacterium tuberculosis, but also the girl received topical imiquimod therapy, which was environmental mycobacteria, Mycobacterium marinum and administered every other day for 20 days. Imiquimod, is Mycobacterium leprae can cause ulcerating skin lesions. an immune-modulating drug, which may be used as part B. mandrillaris is a free-living amoeba that may cause a of the therapy for facial lesions and relapses. The response highly fatal disease. It usually starts as a painless plaque, often after 20 days of treatment was good (see after local trauma. Balamuthia lesions are characterized by Treatment failure occurs in almost one quarter of patients reddish or purplish infiltrations; ulceration is uncommon. after a first course of SSG monotherapy in Peruvian series, The most frequent location of the initial lesion is the central usually within 3 months. Follow-up is therefore recomface, over the nose. In a few months, it can progress to the mended. Factors linked to treatment failure include young brain causing granulomatous amoebic encephalitis. If this age and short stay in endemic area (as in this case) as well occurs, the survival time is usually less than 8 weeks. as recent onset of disease ( 5 weeks), multiple lesions, The most likely diagnosis in our case is cutaneous leish- and L. (V.) braziliensis infection (not present in this case). maniasis, because of the frequency of leishmaniasis in the val- At the third month of follow-up, our patient did not have ley our patient had travelled to and the characteristic any signs of relapse ( presentation (localized painless ulcer with raised edges). The treatment of cutaneous leishmaniasis is challenging because SSG has a high failure rate and several side effects, Answer to Question 2 including myalgia, arthralgia, loss of appetite, nausea, fever, How Would You Approach This Patient? increased levels of liver and pancreatic enzymes, reactivation Gently clean the lesion with water, remove the scab and take of varicella zoster virus and cardiotoxicity, which can lead to a closer look at the process underneath. A definitive diagnosis of cutaneous leishmaniasis requires the demonstration of the parasite through microscopic examination, culture or molecular techniques. The simplest approach is to scrape with a lancet under the edges of the lesion, and use the obtained material for a smear examination with Giemsa staining, looking for Leishmania amastigotes. The sensitivity of this technique is about 70 %, decreasing as the duration of the lesion increases. The specificity is 100 %. Culture can be done on samples obtained by fine-needle aspiration or biopsy taken from the edge of a lesion. In reference centres, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is used to confirm the presence of Leishmania and to identify the species. The Montenegro or leishmanin skin test detects delayed immune response against Leishmania antigens and is sometimes used as a diagnostic aid. It can be negative in early stages of the disease and cannot distinguish current from past infection. If leishmaniasis is ruled out, the following tests can be useful for the diagnosis of alternative causes of our patient’s lesion: smear microscopy and culture in Sabouraud’s medium (for sporotrichosis), a purified protein derivative (PPD) skin test (for tuberculosis) and, if necessary, a histopathological examination of a biopsy specimen. The Case Continued… The scab was removed revealing an ulcer with cobblestonepatterned bottom and raised edges, typical of cutaneous leishmaniasis. The microscopic examination of a sample treatment. --- PAGE BREAK -- 6 prolongation of QT-segment, severe arrhythmias and death. Amphotericin B deoxycholate and liposomal amphotericin B are Information about the safety of this drug in children is lim- second-line drugs. ited. It is also unclear from the literature if there are safe and effective alternatives to SSG in children with L. (V.) peruvi Further Reading ana infection. This is particularly relevant because, in endemic areas, cutaneous leishmaniasis often affects 1. Boelaert M, Sundar S. Leishmaniasis. In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s children. Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 [ 2. Leishmaniasis, Epidemiological situation. World Health Organiza SUMMARY BOX tion; [cited 18 November 2019]. Available from: https://www. who. int/leishmaniasis/burden/en/. Cutaneous Leishmaniasis 3. Llanos-Cuentas A, Tulliano G, Araujo-Castillo R, et al. Clinical and Cutaneous leishmaniasis (CL) is caused by protozoa of the genus parasite species risk factors for pentavalent antimonial treatment Leishmania. Some 20 Leishmania species are associated with failure in cutaneous leishmaniasis in Peru. Clin Infect Dis human disease. CL can be anthroponotic or zoonotic (reservoir: 2008;46(2):223–31. small mammals). The parasite is transmitted by sand flies of the 4. Reveiz L, Maia-Elkhoury AN, Nicholls RS, et al. Interventions for genus Lutzomyia (New World) and Phlebotomus (Old World). Of American cutaneous and mucocutaneous leishmaniasis: a systemthe estimated 1.5 million annual cases, 90 % occur in Afghanistan, atic review update. PLo S One 2013;8(4):e 61843. Pakistan, Iran, Syria, Saudi Arabia, Algeria, Brazil, Colombia and 5. Uribe-Restrepo A, Cossio A, Desai MM, Dávalos D, Castro MDM. Peru. Interventions to treat cutaneous leishmaniasis in children: a system The incubation period between sand fly bite and appearance atic review. PLo S Negl Trop Dis 2018;12:e 0006986. of skin lesions ranges from weeks to months. Clinical manifestations depend on characteristics of the parasite and the host immune response. Localized cutaneous leishmaniasis is the most common form. Some species of the Leishmania Viannia-complex can produce mucosal lesions resulting in disfiguring disease. The lesions can heal spontaneously; this is more common in Old World (>50 %) than in New World leishmaniasis (<20 %). The aim of treatment is to accelerate healing, reduce scarring and decrease the risk of metastasis and recurrence. Topical therapy is recommended for Old World CL and for New World CL caused by species not belonging to the Leishmania Viannia-complex. This topical approach consists of intralesional pentavalent antimony, paromomycin cream and/or cryo- or thermotherapy. Systemic therapy is indicated for CL caused by species of the Leishmania (Viannia)-complex, which may lead to disfiguring mucocutaneous leishmaniasis. In addition, systemic treatment should be given when lesions are extensive or when topical treatment fails. Pentavalent antimonials are the first-line systemic treatment of choice for all New World forms except L. guyanensis, for which pentamidine is recommended. Miltefosine and azoles are alternatives.