3 A 26-Year-Old Woman from Malawi with Headache, Confusion and Unilateral Ptosis JURI KATCHANOV Clinical Presentation History A 26-year-old Malawian woman is brought to the emergency department of a local central hospital by two relatives. She has been unwell for at least 1 week. She complained of a headache of insidious onset and has been confused for 2 days. One day before presentation the relatives (‘guardians’) noticed an eyelid drooping on the left side. The guardians say her past medical history is unremarkable. The patient lives in an urban high-density area. She works as a businesswoman, selling vegetables. She has three healthy children, but another four of her children have died as toddlers. Her husband died a year ago of ‘high fever.’ Clinical Findings On examination she looks seriously unwell. Glasgow Coma Scale 14 /15, temperature 38.4°C (101.1°F), blood pressure 115 /75 mm Hg, heart rate 86 bpm, respiratory rate 18 breath cycles per minute. There is no neck stiffness. The chest is clear. Figure 3.1 shows the examination of her eyes. The remainder of her neurological examination is normal. Laboratory Results Her blood results are shown in Table 3.1. A lumbar puncture the left eye is in a ‘down and out’ position. is done. The opening pressure is markedly raised, at 32 cm H O (12–20 cm H O). The available CSF results are 2 2 shown in Table 3.2. Discussion Questions A young Malawian widow presents with headache and con 1. What is the clinical syndrome and what is the differential fusion. She is febrile and has a unilateral third nerve palsy. diagnosis? The CSF examination reveals an inflammatory picture with 2. How would you manage this patient? low glucose. 7 --- PAGE BREAK -- 8 malaria would be an uncommonly severe manifestation in demic area. In addition, cranial nerve palsies are an unusual Parameter Patient Reference feature of cerebral malaria. WBC ( 109 /L) 3.2 4–10 The differential diagnosis comprises bacterial, tuberculous and cryptococcal meningitis (Table 3.3). Neither the Hb (g/d L) 10.2 12–14 patient’s clinical presentation nor her CSF results can help Platelets ( 109 /L) 155 150–350 differentiate reliably between the three. Furthermore, onset, Serum glucose (mmol/L) 4.0 3.9–11.1 acuteness and duration of symptoms and signs may have to be interpreted with caution in many cultures, particularly when Thick film for malaria and Negative Negative the history cannot be taken from the patients themselves. trypanosomes Answer to Question 2 How Would You Manage This Patient? TABLE CSF Results on Admission The patient has a suspected CNS infection and is seriously ill 3.2 with confusion, cranial nerve palsy and a high fever. Imme Parameter Patient Reference diate action should be taken, and treatment should not be delayed whilst further test results are being awaited. Prag White cell count (/μL) 54 0–5 matic treatment should cover bacterial, cryptococcal and CSF protein (g/L) 3.0 0.25–0.55 tuberculous meningitis. CSF glucose (mmol/L) 1.3 2.0–2.64∗ Gram-stain and bacterial culture should be done from the CSF. If available, an ultrasensitive PCR for M. tuberculosis ∗½ to ⅔ of paired serum glucose sample. (e. g. Xpert MTB/RIF Ultra) should be ordered. The sensitivity of Ziehl–Neelsen stain from the CSF is low in many settings. Cryptococcal antigen (Cr AG) testing should be done from CSF and serum; additionally, India ink stain Answer to Question 1 and fungal culture should be done for detection of Cryptococcus neoformans. What Is the Clinical Syndrome and What Is the Differential Diagnosis? An HIV-serology study is crucial because cryptococcal meningitis is associated with immunosuppression. Tubercu The clinical syndrome is that of infectious meningitis. Infeclous meningitis is also more common in HIV-positive than tious encephalitis should also be considered; however, the in uninfected persons. cranial nerve involvement makes this diagnosis less likely. Moreover, the main causes of infectious encephalitis are viral or – less commonly – protozoan (e. g. cerebral toxoplasmosis, The Case Continued. . . human African trypanosomiasis), and the CSF findings of very high protein and very low glucose are not consistent The patient was started on ceftriaxone 2 g bid, fluconazole with a viral or protozoan CNS infection. Cerebral malaria 1200 mg od (local protocol for cryptococcal meningitis in has to be considered in any patient with fever and impaired the absence of amphotericin B and flucytosin) and on treatconsciousness living in a malarious area. However, cerebral ment for presumptive TB-meningitis. TABLE Clinical and CSF Features of Acute Bacterial, Tuberculous and Cryptococcal Meningitis 3.3 Bacterial Pathogen Clinical Features CSF Features Acute Bacterial Streptococcus pneumoniae, Often very rapid onset with high fever and Often cloudy, high leukocyte cell Meningitis Neisseria meningitidis, meningism, cranial nerve involvement less count, predominance of Streptococcus suis (Asia) common polymorphs, low glucose Tuberculous Mycobacterium tuberculosis Often a history of several days of illness, Often clear, high CSF protein, low Meningitis onset less abrupt, cranial nerve involvement CSF glucose common Cryptococcal Cryptococcus neoformans Often subacute onset, severe headache CSF can be normal in at least 25 % of Meningitis common, cranial nerve involvement cases common --- PAGE BREAK -- The diagnosis of tuberculous meningitis was established. A few days into treatment the patient slipped into a coma. An MRI scan of her brain revealed bilateral basal ganglia infarctions. She died in the hospital. SUMMARY BOX Tuberculous Meningitis Tuberculous (TB) meningitis is the most dramatic form of tuberculosis. After the release of bacilli and granulomatous material into the subarachnoid space, a florid gelatinous exudate forms, which may impair CSF circulation and cause hydrocephalus, cranial nerve palsies and vasculitis. Vasculitis is the most serious complication of tuberculous meningitis and may lead to cerebrovascular accidents. (arrows). (Courtesy Prof. Jeremy Day). acid-fast bacilli are seen in the CSF or detected by a reliable molecular method such as PCR, or if Mycobacterium tuberculosis The HIV test came back reactive. India Ink stain, crypto- is cultured from the CSF. It is crucial to maintain a high index of suspicion in settings with high TB prevalence (Table 3.4). The coccal and bacterial culture were reported negative, but acid WHO now recommends the use of Xpert MTB/RIF Ultra as the fast bacilli were detected in the CSF ( initial diagnostic test for suspected tuberculous meningitis. The Xpert is a cartridge-based fully automated PCR test that can easily be used, even in resource-limited settings. TABLE The Four Pillars of Clinical Diagnosis TB-meningitis is an emergency. Treatment should be started 3.4 of Tuberculous Meningitis without delay once the diagnosis is considered. The WHO recommends treatment with the same regimen as any form of Clinical Criteria Symptom duration >5 days tuberculosis starting with isoniazid, rifampicin, ethambutol Systemic symptoms suggestive of and pyrazinamide. Usually, treatment is for 9 to 12 months. tuberculosis (one or more of the Corticosteroids seem to improve clinical outcomes and are curfollowing): weight loss (or poor weight rently recommended; however, their effects may vary in different gain in children), night sweats, or clinical settings. persistent cough for more than 2 weeks History of close contact with an individual with pulmonary tuberculosis or a positive Further Reading tuberculin skin test within the past year Focal neurological deficit 1. Thwaites G. Tuberculosis. In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical Cranial nerve palsy Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2014 [ Altered consciousness 2. Bahr NC, Nuwagira E, Evans EE, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of CSF Criteria Clear appearance Xpert MTB/RIF Ultra for tuberculous meningitis in HIV-infected Leukocytes: 10–500 /μL adults: a prospective cohort study. Lancet Infect Dis Lymphocytic predominance (>50 %) 2018;18:68–75. Protein concentration >1 g/L 3. Marais S, Thwaites G, Schoeman JF, et al. Tuberculous meningitis: CSF to plasma-glucose ratio <50 % or a uniform case definition for use in clinical research. Lancet Infect absolute CSF glucose concentration Dis 2010;10:803–12. <2.2 mmol/L 4. Thwaites G. Advances in the diagnosis and treatment of tubercu Neuroimaging Hydrocephalus lous meningitis. Curr Opin Neurol 2013;26:295–300. Criteria Basal meningeal enhancement 5. Davis A, Mentjes G, Wilkinson RJ. Treatment of Tuberculous Tuberculoma Meningitis and Its Complications in Adults. Curr Treat Options Infarct Neurol 2018;20:5–15. Pre-contrast basal hyperdensity Evidence of TB Chest radiography suggestive of active Elsewhere TB Evidence for TB outside the CNS on CT, MRI or ultrasound AFB identified or M. tuberculosis cultured from another source (sputum, lymph node, gastric washing, urine, blood culture) Positive commercial M. tuberculosis PCR from extraneural specimen Footnote: Marais, S., Thwaites, G., Schoeman, J. F., etal., 2010. Tuberculous meningitis: a uniform case definition for use in clinical research. Lancet Infect Dis. 10, 803–812.