7 A 28-Year-Old Male Fisherman from Malawi With Shortness of Breath CAMILLA ROTHE Clinical Presentation TABLE Laboratory Results on Admission 7.1 History Parameter Patient Reference Range A 28-year-old Malawian man presents to a local hospital with progressive shortness of breath over the past 5 days. He WBC ( 109 /L) 3.8 4–10 reports orthopnoea and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea. Haemoglobin (mg/d L) 6.0 13–15 He has also developed bilateral flank pain in the past days, MCV (f L) 92 80–99 which is continuous and dull, and there is constant nausea. Platelets ( 109 /L) 187 150–400 There is no cough and no fever. He was diagnosed with arterial hypertension 2 years ear- Creatinine (μmol/L) 1200 <120 lier and prescribed antihypertensive drugs, which he never BUN (mmol/L) 89.3 <17.9 took. No investigations were done at that time. K+ (mmol/l) 7.2 3.5–5.2 His medical history and family history are otherwise unremarkable. A recent HIV test was negative. The patient is a fisherman from a town on the southern shore of Lake Malawi. Clinical Findings The 28-year-old man is not looking chronically ill, but is in respiratory distress. His conjunctivae are notably pale. His blood pressure is 200 /130 mm Hg, pulse 66 bpm, temperature 36.8°C and respiratory rate 32 breath cycles per minute. His apex beat is slightly displaced, but his heart sounds are clear and regular. The jugular venous pressure is not raised. There are bilateral fine crackles over the lung bases. The abdomen is flat and non-tender. There is bilateral renal angle tenderness, and the kidneys are ballottable. There is no peripheral oedema. Laboratory Results His laboratory results on admission are shown in Table 7.1. Imaging His chest radiograph on admission is shown in Figure 7.1. 17 --- PAGE BREAK -- 18 Questions 1. What is your clinical impression? 2. What further investigations would you do to establish the diagnosis? Discussion A young Malawian fisherman presents with signs and symptoms of left ventricular heart failure, hypertension and anaemia. There is renal angle tenderness, and his kidneys appear enlarged. His creatinine is very high and he is hyperkalaemic. Answer to Question 1 What Is Your Clinical Impression? This young man presents with combined left-sided cardiac failure and renal failure. He was diagnosed with hypertension sis. The white arrows show ‘sandy patches’ (left) and hyperaemia of the bladder mucosa (top). (Courtesy Iran Mendonc¸a da Silva.) 2 years prior. It is unclear if his renal incompetence is a cause or the result of his raised blood pressure. The reason for the enlargement of his kidneys could either The next day the patient deteriorated. He became drowsy be primary (e. g. polycystic kidneys) or secondary as a result of and vomited repeatedly. He got progressively bradycardic, post-renal obstruction with hydronephrosis. In renal com- and there was a new pericardial friction rub suggestive of promise secondary to hypertension, one would expect the uraemic pericarditis. kidneys to be small. He was taken to theatre and a bilateral percutaneous Being a fisherman, the patient has been in regular contact nephrostomy was done. The patient was transferred to the with Schistosoma haematobium–infested water in Lake intensive care unit and peritoneal dialysis (PD) was started Malawi. Chronic schistosomiasis with hydronephrosis is (haemodialysis was not available). one of the top differential diagnoses to suspect. The patient improved rapidly, vomiting and drowsiness ceased and his friction rub disappeared. He was discharged Answer to Question 2 home on PD. Two months later he was readmitted with fever and What Further Investigations Would You Like to abdominal pain. He was treated for suspected bacterial peri Perform to Establish the Diagnosis? tonitis but sadly died 3 weeks later still in the hospital. The most useful investigation at this point is an ultrasound of the kidneys to differentiate between, primary renal patholog- SUMMARY BOX ical condition and a post-renal problem. If there was hydronephrosis, obstruction at the level of the bladder seems most Genitourinary Schistosomiasis likely because both kidneys appear enlarged. Genitourinary schistosomiasis caused by Schistosoma On cystoscopy, endoscopists can macroscopically estab- haematobium is endemic in large parts of Africa and in the Middle lish the diagnosis, but ideally, biopsies should be performed East. Schistosomiasis is one of the most common tropical to look for evidence of granulomatous inflammation and S. diseases in migrants from endemic countries and should actively haematobium ova in the tissue and to rule out neoplasia. In be s A c b r o e u en t e 5 d 0 % for. of Schistosoma eggs are shed through urine, chronic infection, urine microscopy may be negative for ova the other half remain trapped in the tissue causing of S. haematobium. granulomatous inflammation. Around 10 % of people infected progress to chronic late-stage disease. Risk factors for disease progression are poorly understood and include intensity and The Case Continued. . . duration of infection, host genetic factors and parasite strain differences. Despite high doses of furosemide, the patient remained Chronic infection leads to granulomatous inflammation of oliguric. Glucose and insulin were administered for his bladder wall and ureteral mucosa resulting in obstructive hyperkalaemia. uropathy, hydronephrosis, recurrent bacterial pyelonephritis and end-stage renal disease. It is also suspected to contribute to Ultrasound showed bilateral hydronephrosis with massive the development of squamous cell carcinoma of the bladder. dilatation of the renal pelvis and calyces. The remaining renal The pathological changes can long go unnoticed. parenchyma was very thin in both kidneys. Egg deposition in the female genital tract may result in Cystoscopy revealed a hyperaemic mucosa with multiple dyspareunia, chronic lower abdominal pain, ectopic pregnancy ‘sandy patches’ suggestive of granulomatous lesions in the and infertility and has also been associated with an increased risk of HIV infection. Men may present with scrotal swelling, orchitis mucosa. No tumour was seen. An endoscopic diagnosis of uroand prostatitis, haematospermia and oligospermia. genital schistosomiasis was made. Histology was not available. --- PAGE BREAK -- Further Reading In advanced stages of schistosomiasis, the proof of Schistosoma eggs in the urine is challenging because the adult flukes may have long died and egg production may have 1. Bustinduy AL, King CH. Schistosomiasis. In: Farrar J, editor. stopped. Biopsy is often unavailable and serology is unhelpful Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 in an endemic setting, because it can only detect exposure [ without indicating the activity, duration or quantum of infection. 2. Colley DG, Bustinduy AL, Secor WE, King CH. Human schisto A promising point-of-care diagnostic tool may be circulating somiasis. Lancet 2014;383:2253–64. anodic antigen (CAA), which is under development. 3. Poggensee G, Feldmeier H. Female genital schistosomiasis: facts The investigation of choice is ultrasound. Hydronephrosis and and hypotheses. Acta Trop 2001;79(3):193–210. bladder wall abnormalities can easily be demonstrated. On cystoscopy a hyperaemic mucosa with ‘sandy patches’ 4. Asundi A, Belavsky A, Liu XJ, et al. Prevalence of strongyloidiasis and schistosomiasis among migrants: a systematic review and metamay be seen ( mucosal irregularities associated with heavy egg deposition analysis. Lancet Glob Health 2019;7:e 236–48. surrounded by fibrous tissue pathognomonic for schistosomiasis. Praziquantel may reverse the early stages of infection but has little role to play in advanced hydronephrosis. It may still be given to kill remaining adult flukes. Otherwise, late-stage urogenital schistosomiasis has to be managed symptomatically, which can be challenging in settings where renal replacement therapy is not an option.