8 A 26-Year-Old Female Traveller Returning from Ghana With a Boil on the Leg CAMILLA ROTHE Clinical Presentation Questions History 1. What are your most important differential diagnoses? A 26-year-old German student presents to the clinic because 2. How would you approach this patient? of a localized swelling on her left leg. She has just returned from a 6-week trip to Ghana. Discussion The swelling has developed slowly over the past 3 weeks. It is itchy, but not painful. There is no history of fever; no A young traveller presents with a localized swelling on her leg history of arthropod bites. The patient is otherwise fine. after backpacking in Ghana. The swelling has been growing slowly and there are no systemic signs or symptoms. Clinical Findings Answer to Question 1 There is localized swelling on the left leg, about 1.5 cm in What Are Your Most Important Differential diameter ( Diagnoses? slightly hyperaemic. The boil is covered by a blackish scab. There is no lymphadenopathy. The patient is afebrile while There is a localized swelling with a central scab. This lesion the rest of the physical examination is normal. may look similar to an eschar seen in rickettsial disease or in cutaneous anthrax, yet the absence of systemic symptoms renders these differentials unlikely. The clinical presentation suggests a topical process. Spider bites may cause lesions with an eschar-like central necrosis (e. g. the brown recluse spider); however, the slow growth of the lesion over several weeks makes this differential unlikely. Localized bacterial skin and soft-tissue infections such as folliculitides, furuncles, carbuncles or abscesses are very common among backpacking travellers. A hot and humid tropical climate combined with low standards of hygiene favour bacterial and fungal skin infections. Itchy mosquito bites may serve as a portal of entry. Bacterial spread often occurs via scratching or contaminated items such as towels and shavers. Another important differential diagnosis in this case is an infestation with fly maggots (myiasis). The slow growth of the boil, the absence of lymphadenopathy and systemic Dr Sebastian Dieckmann) likely differential diagnosis. 20 --- PAGE BREAK -- Answer to Question 2 In sub-Saharan Africa, myiasis is usually caused by the larvae How Would You Approach This Patient? of Cordylobia anthropophaga, also known as Tumbu fly, Mango fly or Putzi fly. Adult female flies deposit their eggs on sandy Gently remove the scab and take a closer look at the lesion ground or on damp laundry spread out on the ground or hung on using a magnifying glass. a clothesline to dry. Normal hosts are dogs and rodents. Humans become infected when lying on the ground or wearing contaminated clothes without prior hot ironing. Larvae hatch and burrow The Case Continued… into the skin. Over the following 2 to 3 weeks the developing larvae cause an itchy and at times painful ‘blind boil.’ Lesions are The scab was removed and a whitish matter was detected usually sterile because of bacteriostatic substances produced in the larvae’s guts. underneath. Using a magnifying glass, one could see that Treatment aims to deprive the larvae of oxygen, which the matter was not a pustular head but appeared to be pulprompts them to extrude from the skin. This can be achieved by sating and oozing transparent fluid. This appearance is typ- applying white petroleum jelly or liquid paraffin on the lesion ical of myiasis – the pulsating end of the larva seen contains to block their respiratory spiracles. Immature larvae are best the respiratory spiracles. left to develop for a while because they are difficult to retrieve, and maceration of the larva can lead to inflammation and The lesion was covered with white petroleum jelly and superinfection. Even untreated, cutaneous myiasis is selfbandaged. The patient returned 2 days later for review. limiting because the mature larva has to leave the host and The maggot of a Tumbu fly was easily removed with a pair pupate elsewhere. of forceps. The remaining lesion looked clean and no further In Central and South America, myiasis is caused by Dermatreatment was required. tobia hominis, the human botfly ( this species lays its eggs directly on exposed skin. Furthermore, it deposits its ova on blood-sucking insects such as mosquitoes, flies or ticks, which afterwards convey them to the human host, a technique called ‘hitch-hiking.’ Removal of botfly larvae can be slightly challenging because of their shape, and the process may require local anaesthesia and cruciate incision. Additional forms of myiasis exist whereby larvae may invade various body cavities such as nasal sinuses, ears, mouth, eye, vagina or anus (body cavity myiasis). Wounds can be infested as well. Further Reading 1. Mumcuoglu KY. Other Ectoparasites: Leeches, Myiasis and Sand Fleas. In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 [ 2. Solomon M, Lachish T, Schwartz E. Cutaneous myiasis. Curr Infect Dis Rep 2016;18(28):1–7. 3. Francesconi F, Lupi O. Myiasis. Clin Microbiol Rev 2012;25(1): 79–105. 4. Vasievich MP, Martinez Villarreal JD, Tomecki KJ. Got the travel bug? A review of common infections, infestations, bites and stings among returning travelers. Am J Clin Dermatol 2016;17: 451–62. Dieckmann) SUMMARY BOX Myiasis Myiasis is the infestation of live humans and vertebrate animals with larvae (maggots) of flies, which feed on the host’s dead or living tissue, liquid body-substance or ingested food. It derives from the Greek word “myia” which means “fly.” Cutaneous furuncular myiasis is one of the most common travel-associated skin disorders.