17 A 34-Year-Old Man from Thailand With Fever and a Papular Rash JURI KATCHANOV AND HARTMUT STOCKER Clinical Presentation lymphadenopathy with visibly swollen lymph nodes in the left supraclavicular region; his inguinal and axillary lymph History nodes are also enlarged. On abdominal examination, the spleen is palpable at two fingers below the left costal margin. A 34-year-old man from Phuket, Thailand presents to a hos The liver span is 15 cm in the midclavicular line. pital in Germany with a 2-week history of fever. He has also noticed a papular rash affecting his whole body, particularly his face and trunk. When asked, he reports weight loss (7 kg Laboratory Results in the last 3 months). He lives in Thailand and arrived in Germany only 3 days Full blood count: WBC 2.1 109 /L (reference range 4–10), previously to visit friends. haemoglobin 9.8 g/d L (13–16), platelets 110 109 /L (150– 350). C-reactive protein 150 mg/L (<5). Clinical Findings Questions On examination, the patient is febrile with a temperature of 38.2°C (100.76°F). His conjunctivae are pale. He is very 1. What is the single most important test to be done in this wasted, with a body mass index of 14 kg/m 2. patient? The patient has a generalized non-pruritic rash, predom- 2. What is your differential diagnosis? inantly on his face and trunk, which consists of small umbilicated papules ( A 34-year-old man from Thailand presents with a 2-week history of fever and a 3-month history of wasting. On examination, he has mild hepatosplenomegaly, generalized lymphadenopathy and a papular rash. The laboratory results reveal pancytopenia and an elevated C-reactive protein. Answer to Question 1 What is the Single Most Important Test to be Done in This Patient? The most important test to be done is an HIV serology. The patient presents with fever, unexplained weight loss, lymphadenopathy and a papular rash; his blood results show pancytopenia. Each of these conditions alone should warrant HIV testing. Answer to Question 2 What is Your Differential Diagnosis? Common causes of fever, generalized lymphadenopathy and 43 --- PAGE BREAK -- 44 Apart from HIV, CMV and EBV infection should be considered. All three of these viral infections may present with fever, hepatosplenomegaly and a rash, but umbilicated papular lesions are not part of the clinical picture. However, in HIV-infected individuals, mollusca contagiosa are common, which resemble the lesions seen in this patient. Disseminated tuberculosis and infections with atypical mycobacteria are important differential diagnoses. Both can also present with cutaneous manifestations. An infection that resembles mycobacterioses in many ways is melioidosis. Melioidosis is one of the leading causes of communityacquired septicaemia in Thailand. It may present with lymphadenitis and disseminated papular skin lesions. Bartonella spp. (B. henselae, B. quintana) cause bacillary angiomatosis in immunosuppressed individuals. Bacillary angiomatosis presents with non-specific systemic symptoms round-shaped yeast-like structures (PAS stain, 400). Inset: Prominent septal wall (‘septation’) as a result of reproduction by fission. (Courtesy and umbilicated papular skin lesions. However, these pap U. Zimmermann, M. Gru€nbaum and H. Herbst.) ules are usually erythematous. Fungal infections to consider in this patient are cryptococcosis, histoplasmosis and talaromycosis (previously 102 /μL and the viral load was suppressed. This second infecpenicilliosis), which are all commonly associated with immu- tion within 6 months after starting ART was interpreted as nosuppression but may also rarely occur in non- an immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS) of immunosuppressed individuals. All three may also present the unmasking type. with umbilicated, papular skin lesions. Visceral leishmaniasis SUMMARY BOX causes fever, wasting, hepatosplenomegaly and pancytopenia. It does however not cause a papular rash. It has been Talaromycosis (Penicilliosis) reported from Thailand, but appears to be uncommon. Neoplasms to consider include lymphomas and non- Talaromycosis (previously penicilliosis) is caused by Talaromyces (Penicillium) marneffei, a dimorphic fungus endemic to East and malignant neoplastic conditions such as HHV-8-associated Castleman’s disease. South-east Asia. Incidence of talaromycosis has increased in parallel with the AIDS pandemic. It is the third commonest AIDSrelated opportunistic infection in Thailand and Vietnam after The Case Continued… tuberculosis and cryptococcosis. Talaromycosis has also been reported in immunosuppressed travellers to endemic areas. Acquisition and transmission of talaromycosis, either by inhalation The HIV test came back positive. The patient was found to or by direct inoculation, have not been fully understood; the only be highly immunosuppressed, with a CD 4 cell count of 2 /μL known hosts are humans and bamboo rats. (normal range: 500–1000 /μL). Talaromycosis usually affects severely immunocompromised Blood cultures were taken. A fine needle aspirate of the individuals who frequently have other concurrent opportunistic lymph node and a skin biopsy were performed, and the mate- infections. Patients present with non-specific symptoms such as prolonged fever, fatigue, weight loss and diarrhoea. Clinical signs rial was sent for microbiological and pathological work-up. are lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly and anaemia. Gen Histopathology of the lymph node biopsy showed multiple eralized umbilicated papular skin lesions can help the clinician yeast-like structures ( bacilli seen. The blood culture and cultures from the skin located on the face, on the chest and on the extremities. Lung biopsy and lymph node all grew Talaromyces (Penicillium) involvement is common and chest radiography may reveal diffuse marneffei. reticulonodular or alveolar infiltrates. Diagnosis is made by identification of the fungus by micros The diagnosis of talaromycosis was made and the patient copy and culture. Blood, bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, or biopsies was started on a 2-week course of intravenous liposomal of skin, lymph nodes or bone marrow are appropriate clinical amphotericin B followed by oral itraconazole. On 3-week specimens. Microscopical examination reveals extracellular and follow-up he was afebrile and gaining weight. Antiretroviral intracellular yeasts. The extracellular forms often have a transverse septum as a result of binary fission. therapy (ART) was initiated. Treatment is with intravenous amphotericin B for 2 weeks Six months later the patient presented with a recurrence of followed by oral itraconazole. Secondary prophylaxis in HIVhis cervical lymphadenopathy. A talaromycosis relapse was infected patients with itraconazole (200 mg od) has been sugsuspected. However, this time an infection with atypical gested until a CD 4-count of 100 cells/μL has been maintained mycobacteria was found. His CD 4 count had come up to for at least 6 months. --- PAGE BREAK -- Further Reading 4. Chastain DB, Henao-Martínez AF, Franco-Paredes C. Opportunistic Invasive Mycoses in AIDS: Cryptococcosis, Histoplasmosis, 1. Wood R. Clinical features and management of HIV/AIDS. Coccidiodomycosis, and Talaromycosis. Curr Infect Dis Rep In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. 2017;19(10):36. London: Elsevier; 2014 [ 2. Hay RJ. Fungal infections. In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical tericin B for HIV-Associated Talaromycosis. N Engl J Med Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 [ 3. Chakrabarti A, Slavin MA. Endemic fungal infections in the Asia– Pacific region. Med Mycol 2011;49(4):337–344.