20 A 43-Year-Old Male Traveller Returning from Mozambique With Fever and Eosinophilia GERD-DIETER BURCHARD Clinical Presentation TABLE Laboratory Results on Admission 20.1 History Parameter Patient Reference A 43-year-old German man presents to a local travel clinic on 21 May because of fever. He had been in Mozambique from WBC ( 109 /L) 9.0 4–11.3 16 April to 30 April, and travelled to Chile afterwards from Eosinophils ( 109 /L) 2.1 <0.5 30 April to 17 May. He did not take any malaria chemopro LDH (U/L) 422 135–225 phylaxis in Mozambique and reports self-treatment for malaria with atovaquone/proguanil because of fever (27 April Creatinine (μmol/L) 88.4 53–106 to 29 April). He is now complaining of recurrent fever for the AST/GOT (U/L) 106 10–50 past 3 days. The day before presentation his temperature was as high as 39.8°C (103.6°F). He also has some headache and ALT/GPT (U/L) 179 10–50 diarrhoea. GGT (U/L) 186 <65 He reports freshwater contact in a small lake near C-reactive protein (mg/L) 57.9 <5 Maputo. His past medical history is unremarkable. Clinical Findings 43-year-old male, febrile, with a temperature of 39.2°C (102.6°F). The rest of the physical examination is normal and there is no rash, no hepatomegaly, no splenomegaly and no lymphadenopathy. Laboratory Results The relevant laboratory results on admission are shown in Further Investigations Electrocardiogram is normal. Chest radiography reveals some nodular lesions ranging in size from 2 to 5 mm in the periphery of the lower lung zones bilaterally ( his chest. of both lungs. 52 --- PAGE BREAK -- Answer to Question 2 Questions What is the Significance of Eosinophilia in 1. What are your differential diagnoses and which investiga- Returning Travellers? tions would you like to do? In any patient returning from the tropics with eosinophilia, a 2. What is the significance of eosinophilia in returning helminth infection should be ruled out. The most relevant travellers? differential diagnosis in this patient who presents with eosinophilia and fever reporting freshwater contact is acute schis Discussion tosomiasis, also known as Katayama syndrome. Another rare cause of fever, eosinophilia and elevated liver transaminases is A 43-year-old man presents with of a 3-day history of high acute fascioliasis. fever. He has recently returned from a 5-week trip to Mozambique and Chile. He did not take any malarial chemoprophylaxis, but he took standby emergency treatment for presumed The Case Continued… malaria when feeling febrile about 3 weeks ago. He reports Thick films for Plasmodium species were negative. Microsfreshwater contact in Mozambique. On examination he is copy of stool and urine samples for Schistosoma eggs were febrile. His FBC shows eosinophilia with a normal total white three times negative. cell count. His liver enzymes, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) The patient was tested for antischistosomal antibodies and C-reactive protein (CRP) are slightly raised. Chest radiusing an enzyme-immunoassay and an immunofluorescence ography and CT show small, nodular changes in the periphery assay (IFA); both came back negative. of both lungs. Four weeks later antischistosomal antibodies could be detected (IFA 1:1280, cercarial- and egg-ELISA positive). Answer to Question 1 S. mansoni ova were found in the stool and a diagnosis of What Are Your Differential Diagnoses and Which schistosomiasis was established. The patient was treated with Investigations Would You Like to Do? praziquantel. The patient has travelled in Mozambique without taking any antimalarial chemoprophylaxis. Thus first of all malaria has to be excluded – irrespective of any other symptoms or laboratory results. The differential diagnosis of pyrexia in a returned traveller is long, but typhoid fever and amoebic liver abscess should always be excluded because they are common and potentially life-threatening diseases. Therefore blood cultures should be taken and an abdominal ultrasound should be done. In contrast to what was seen in this patient though, typhoid fever usually causes eosinopaenia. The further differential diagnosis of fever after a stay in tropical areas relies on the precise itinerary, the activities indulged in during travel, the presence of focal symptoms, signs and laboratory results. The patient has slightly elevated liver enzymes. The differential diagnosis of acute infections involving the liver SUMMARY BOX includes viral hepatitis, including hepatitis E. EBV and CMV infections may also cause fever, elevated Acute Schistosomiasis (Katayama Syndrome) liver enzymes and a rise in LDH. They are important differentials of fever in returned travellers. However, EBV and Acute schistosomiasis (Katayama syndrome) is an acute hypersensitivity reaction caused by newly expressed antigens on CMV cause lymphocytosis with atypical lymphocytes, rather developing worms. It is named after the Katayama region in than eosinophilia. Splenomegaly is usually part of the clinical Japan, where it was first described. picture of mononucleosis and lymphadenopathy, even though Katayama syndrome usually occurs 2 to 12 weeks after the latter can be less prominent in acute CMV infection. Schistosoma infection. It is characterized by fever, urticaria and a Leptospirosis, rickettsioses and Q-fever are bacterial infec- dry cough sometimes accompanied by a wheeze. Patchy pulmonary infiltrates or micronodular changes in the lower lung tions to consider, as well as brucellosis, secondary syphilis zones may be present on chest radiograph. Full blood count in and relapsing fever. Yet none of these infections as such the majority of cases shows eosinophilia, but of note, eosinophilia would explain the patient’s pronounced eosinophilia. can occur with a delay of several weeks after the onset of --- PAGE BREAK -- 54 Further Reading symptoms and may be missed. Most patients recover spontaneously after 2 to 10 weeks. Rarely, neurological complications can occur, e. g. transverse myelitis, conus medullaris or cauda 1. Bustinduy AL, King CH. Schistosomiasis. In: Farrar J, editor. equina syndrome. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2014 Diagnosis of acute schistosomiasis can be challenging. [ Schistosoma ova ( at this early stage and serological tests can take up to 3 months to drome without Schistosoma mansoni eggs. Ann Intern Med become positive. As a consequence, these investigations have to 2019;170(10):732–3. be repeated several times after the diagnosis has been clinically 3. Checkley AM, Chiodini PL, Dockrell DH, et al. Eosinophilia in suspected. PCR-based methods are promising for the diagnosis of acute Schistosoma infection in recently primarily exposed returning travellers and migrants from the tropics: UK recommendations for investigation and initial management. J Infect 2010; populations such as travellers. Praziquantel has a lack of activity against immature flukes and 60(1):1–20. severe reactions have been reported after praziquantel treatment 4. Logan S, Armstrong M, Moore E, et al. Acute schistosomiasis in during the acute phase. Therefore antiparasitic treatment should travelers: 14 years’ experience at the Hospital for Tropical Diseases, be delayed until the flukes are adult, i. e. until eggs can be detected London. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2013;88(6):1032–4. in stool or urine. 5. Bonneford S, Cnops L, Duvignaud A, et al. Early complicated Under certain circumstances, such as severe symptoms and schistosomiasis in a returning traveller: Key contribution of new in particular neurological complications, supportive steroid ther- molecular diagnostic methods. Intern J Inf Dis 2019;79:72–4. apy may be useful in Katayama syndrome. Of note, different stages of the parasite life cycle may overlap in a patient who is infected with many schistosomules. Therefore control examinations after several months are necessary and treatment with praziquantel may have to be repeated.