21 A 35-Year-Old American Man With Fatigue and a Neck Lesion MARY E. WRIGHT AND ARTHUR M. FRIEDLANDER Clinical Presentation History A 35-year-old Caucasian male presents to a clinic in the United States with fatigue and a rash on his neck that started as a papule 2 days earlier. The lesion is non-pruritic, but it is associated with significant non-painful swelling and a pressure sensation in the neck. There is no history of fever, but the patient reports at least one episode of diaphoresis with mild confusion and headache. The patient recalls a break in the skin at the site of the lesion 3 days before while shaving and is sure that he has not been bitten by an insect. He has had no contact with after the onset of a small papule. animals and no foreign travel within the previous year. He had come to the clinic 24 hours earlier with similar symptoms. After blood cultures were obtained, he was given Investigations one dose of a first-generation cephalosporin and discharged on a ten-day oral course. He returns because of worsening Full blood count, Na+, K+, Cl HCO , BUN, creatinine and 3 malaise and neck swelling associated with mild difficulty random glucose are normal except for a mildly elevated haebreathing. moglobin at 18.7 g/d L (reference range: 13.0–18.0 g/d L). The past medical history is unremarkable. The patient is a postal worker by profession. Questions Clinical Findings 1. What are the distinguishing features of this lesion that help narrow down your differential diagnosis? Examination reveals a 2 cm irregularly shaped, indurated 2. What investigations need to be performed to establish non-tender patch on the left anterior neck with mild overly- early diagnosis and appropriate treatment? ing erythema and several 2 to 3 mm vesicles. The main lesion has a 6 mm shallow ulceration. There is massive neck oedema Discussion making lymph nodes difficult to assess (see neck circumference had increased from 57 cm at baseline A 35-year-old male postal worker presents to a clinic in the to a peak of 81 cm. Temperature is 36.9°C (98.4°F), pulse United States with a papulovesicular lesion on his neck asso 118 bpm, blood pressure 138 /90 mm Hg and respiratory rate ciated with massive neck swelling. There is no fever but dia 20 breath cycles per minute. The remainder of the initial phoresis is present. The patient’s condition is worsening physical examination is normal. despite antibiotic therapy with an oral cephalosporin. 55 --- PAGE BREAK -- 56 Answer to Question 1 The Case Continued… What Are the Distinguishing Features of This Blood cultures taken at the first clinic visit grew gram Lesion that Help Narrow Down Your Differential positive rods. Gram stain and culture of the skin lesion Diagnosis? obtained at the second visit were negative for B. anthracis. The differential diagnosis of an ulcerative skin lesion with The patient was admitted and received intravenous levofloxconcomitant massive soft tissue swelling and systemic sympacin and ampicillin-sulbactam and recovered. Stains for toms depends on the epidemiological setting and the individbacteria and IHC of the skin biopsy performed at a reference ual exposure; it includes bacterial ecthyma (Streptococcus laboratory showed abundant bacilli in the dermis and the pyogenes, Staphylococcus aureus), rickettsial diseases, necrotic presence of B. anthracis antigens, respectively. Serology arachnidism (bite by brown recluse spider), rat-bite fevers revealed that antibody to protective antigen was present in Streptococcus moniliformis and (Spirillum minus), ulceroconvalescent serum. glandular tularaemia and bubonic plague. The patient was exposed during his occupation as a postal At the time of the patient’s presentation, the United States worker, handling contaminated mail. Overall, 22 cases were was in the process of investigating a possible event of bioteridentified, of which 11 presented with cutaneous anthrax, rorism. Therefore the most important, though overall rare, and a further 11 fell ill with the inhalational form. Five peodiagnosis to consider was cutaneous anthrax. ple died; all deaths occurred secondary to inhalational There may be few distinguishing features at the time of anthrax. presentation, depending on the age of the lesion. Although it is commonly known that cutaneous anthrax is manifested SUMMARY BOX by a central black eschar, this is not seen until approximately a week after inoculation. The anthrax lesion begins as a pain- Anthrax less papule that lasts 1 to 2 days before becoming a vesicle Anthrax is caused by B. anthracis, a Gram-positive rod that forms that later ruptures. It then develops the classic necrotic cen- spores under certain environmental conditions. It is primarily a tral ulcer and may be surrounded by smaller peripheral ves- zoonotic disease affecting domestic and wild herbivores. Anthrax icles. Therefore a patient may present with a non-specific remains endemic in animals worldwide, most importantly in Asia, Africa and South-eastern Australia, as well as parts of the localized papulovesicular eruption. Key associated findings southern and western United States. Humans usually acquire the include a preceding history of a break in the skin at the infection when they are exposed to infected animals or animal affected site, the presence of systemic symptoms such as mal- products, but anthrax has also been used as an agent of aise and headache and extensive, non-tender oedema. Fever bioterrorism. In the developed world, cases usually tend to be and leukocytosis may not be present. In parts of the world sporadic. In resource-limited countries anthrax remains a relevant public health problem and large outbreaks can where anthrax is endemic, zoonotic exposure to infected anioccasionally occur. mals or contaminated animal products is important to estab- Depending on the route of entry, B. anthracis can cause lish, whereas exposure from a bioterrorism act may not be cutaneous, gastrointestinal or inhalational disease. Cutaneous immediately apparent. anthrax is the most common form worldwide, accounting for 95 % of all human cases. Although only a small percentage develop systemic disease, it can be lethal if not treated quickly. The clinical marker lesion is a painless central ulcer with ves Answer to Question 2 icles and extensive surrounding oedema, but the initial lesion will appear as a non-specific papulovesicular eruption. What Investigations Need to be Performed to History includes recent exposure to infected animals or con Establish Early Diagnosis and Appropriate taminated animal products, unless the setting is a bioterrorism Treatment? event, a previous break in the skin at the affected site and the presence of systemic symptoms in disseminated disease. A high Aspirate of fluid from the skin lesion should be sent for Gram index of suspicion is critical to the diagnosis. Differential diagnosis stain, culture and susceptibilities along with blood cultures in of cutaneous anthrax depends on the setting and the individual patients with systemic symptoms regardless of fever status. In exposures; it includes bacterial ecthyma, rickettsial diseases, the absence of preceding antimicrobial therapy, numerous rat-bite fevers, necrotic arachnidism, ulceroglandular tularaemia and bubonic plague. Gram-positive rods in high concentration will grow within Gram stain and culture of affected fluids (blood, skin lesion 24 hours. Empirical antibacterial treatment with a quinolone aspirate, pleural fluid) and paired serological testing for antibodies or doxycycline should be instituted while awaiting microbi- to protective antigen remain the cornerstone of diagnosis. ological results. Because negative cultures do not exclude However, negative cultures do not exclude anthrax. In cutaneous anthrax, full-thickness punch biopsy from the vesicle and anthrax, full-thickness punch biopsy from the vesicle and eschar should be fixed and sent to a specialized laboratory for PCR and the eschar should be obtained, fixed in 10 % buffered formaimmunohistochemical staining. Empirical antibacterial treatment lin and sent to a specialized laboratory for nucleic acid ampliwith a quinolone or doxycycline should be instituted while fication and immunohistochemical (IHC) staining to detect awaiting results for limited cutaneous infection. When dissemi Bacillus anthracis antigens. Serum should also be tested for nated infection or other forms of anthrax are suspected, antibodies to the protective antigen at baseline and multi-drug therapy that includes those with CNS penetration should be used. 4 weeks later. --- PAGE BREAK -- 2. Carlson CJ, Kracalik IT, Ross N, et al. The global distribution of Although 7 to 10 days of antibiotic treatment are usually sufficient in cutaneous anthrax, up to 60 days of antibiotics are Bacillus anthracis and associated anthrax risk to humans, livestock needed in inhalational disease because of the possibility of and wildlife. Nat Microbiol 2019;4:1337–43. retained ungerminated spores in the lungs. Prevention of anthrax 3. Gold H. Anthrax: a report of one hundred seventeen cases. AMA involves either prevention of exposure in occupational settings or Arch Intern Med 1955;96(3):387–96. immunization. In the setting of a suspected bioterrorism event, 4. Shieh WJ, Guarner J, Paddock C, et al. The critical role of pathology those at risk of exposure should receive a 60-day course of in the investigation of bioterrorism-related cutaneous anthrax. Am J postexposure prophylaxis with oral antibiotics. Pathol 2003;163(5):1901–10. 5. Hendricks KA, Wright ME, Shadomy SV, et al. Centers for Disease Further Reading Control and Prevention expert panel meetings on prevention and treatment of anthrax in adults. Emerg Infect Dis 2014;20(2). 1. Eitzen E. Anthrax. In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. https://doi. org/10.3201 /eid 2002.130687. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 [chapter 31].