22 32-Year-Old Woman from Nigeria With Jaundice and Confusion CHRISTOPHER J. M. WHITTY Clinical Presentation reason to exclude malaria, because the temperature swings in malaria and a significant proportion of cases are apyrexial at History presentation. A common misdiagnosis is acute viral hepatitis; there, fever precedes the jaundice, and this rapid fulminant A 32-year-old, previously fit woman of African descent born course would not be typical. Other causes of acute fever and in Europe, travelled to rural Jos in Nigeria to visit relatives. jaundice include typhoid fever, leptospirosis and ascending According to her husband, 18 days after her return to Europe cholangitis. Patients with advanced HIV disease and she developed a fever, and 3 days later became very unwell Gram-negative sepsis can also present like this. with abnormal behaviour. People returning from visiting friends and relatives constitute a large proportion of imported malaria and are at high risk Clinical Findings of not taking antimalarial prophylaxis. A woman born in On examination she has a temperature of 37.5°C (99.5°F), is Europe would be unlikely to have any immunity to malaria. mildly jaundiced and confused; her Glasgow Coma Scale is Answer to Question 2 14 /15. She has no rash or palpable lymph nodes, and throat and sclerae are not injected. She has some fine crepitations at Is Viral Haemorrhagic Fever (VHF) a Real Risk, and the lung bases. which Single Test is Most Important? The laboratory is right to raise VHF as a possible diagnosis, Laboratory Results but VHF is very rare and 18 days (or more) since leaving the The laboratory refuses to undertake tests because of recent rural high-risk area is on the outer limit of the incubation period of exposure in an area known to have viral haemorrhagic Lassa fever and other VHF (generally up to 21 days). The fever (Lassa). absence of injected sclerae or rash is also against the diagnosis. A malaria blood film would be mandatory in this case. If Questions it is positive, the woman could be treated as malaria and other tests taken with standard universal precautions. 1. What is the differential diagnosis? 2. Is viral haemorrhagic fever (VHF) a real risk, and which The Case Continued… single test is the most important? The patient was found to have a Plasmodium falciparum par Discussion asite count of 18 % and a plasma creatinine of 430 μmol/L (reference range 45–90 μmol/L), demonstrating acute kid A young woman presents with a fever, jaundice and confusion ney injury. Urine output failed to respond to fluid chalalmost 3 weeks after returning from a visit to rural Nigeria. lenges, therefore pre-renal failure could be ruled out. She The patient is of African ethnicity but was born in Europe. was treated with intravenous artesunate and the parasite count dropped to 5 % but she lapsed into deep coma. Renal Answer to Question 1 function deteriorated and she needed haemofiltration. After What is the Differential Diagnosis? the parasites had cleared on day 5, her consciousness level The differential diagnosis is wide, but by some distance the began to improve, but she developed laboured breathing. most common cause of fever and jaundice or fever and con- The chest radiography findings were suggestive of ARDS, fusion in West Africa is severe falciparum malaria. The fact and she required prolonged respiratory support. She eventuthat the patient had a low-grade fever at presentation is not a ally made a full recovery. 58 --- PAGE BREAK -- Pf PR 2-10 >70 % 0 % Unstable transmission Risk free Pv PR 1-99 >7 % 0 % Unstable transmission Unstable transmission and high Duffy negativity Risk free the model-based geostatistical point (MBG) estimates of the Plasmodium falciparum annual mean parasite rate Pf PR 2–10 (defined as the predicted proportion of 2–10-year-olds with patent parasitaemia) for 2010 within the spatial limits of stable P. falciparum malaria transmission. Lower panel shows equivalent estimates of the Plasmodium vivax annual mean parasite rate (Pv PR 1–99). Note this prediction is for all age groups (1–99). Areas in which the Duffy negativity gene frequency is predicted to exceed 90 % are shown in hatching. (Reproduced from Farrar, J. et al., 2013. Manson’s Tropical Diseases, 23 rd ed. Elsevier, London. --- PAGE BREAK -- 60 and get effective antimalarial drugs into the patient as soon as possible. SUMMARY BOX Further Reading Malaria Malaria is the most common life-threatening infection in patients 1. White NJ. Malaria. In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical who have recently arrived from Africa. It is also common, but Diaseses. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 [ much less so, from South and South-east Asia ( A history of fever is usual in non-immune patients, but other from imported falciparum malaria in the United Kingdom over features of the presentation are non-specific and overlap with 20 years: an observational study. BMJ 2012;344:e 2116. many other infections, with headache and malaise. Malaria should 3. WHO Global Malaria Programme. Management of Severe always be high on the list of differential diagnoses for any unwell Malaria – A Practical Handbook. 3 rd ed. Geneva: WHO; 2013. patient from the tropics, because there are many misleading 4. Ashley EA, Phyo AP, Woodrow CJ. Malaria. Lancet presentations. The only way to exclude malaria is a malaria blood test. 2018;391:1608–21. Diagnosed early before complications begin, falciparum malaria is relatively easily treated with antimalarial drug combinations. In patients with severe malaria, artesunate is the drug of choice; if this is not available locally, artemether or quinine are the alternatives. In adults, cerebral malaria (for practical purposes altered consciousness, seizures), acute renal failure and pulmonary oedema or ARDS are the most common manifestations of severity, and may occur together or in any combination. Renal failure, and in particular ARDS, often presents later in treatment, and may first become apparent after all parasites have cleared. Disseminated intravascular coagulation and shock (often with coexisting bacteraemia) are rare complications. Elderly patients have a high mortality. Various adjunctive treatments for malaria complications have been tried but to date none shows survival advantage. The key to malaria management is to diagnose it early