23 A 31-Year-Old HIV-Positive Business Traveller With Cough, Shortness of Breath and Night Sweats ROBERT F. MILLER Clinical Presentation TABLE Arterial Blood Gases on Ambient Air 23.1 History Parameter Patient Reference Range A 31-year-old HIV-positive man presents to the Emerp H 7.44 7.35–7.45 gency Department of a London hospital. He has a 6-week history of increasing shortness of breath on exertion, dry Pa O 2 (k Pa) 7.6 10.67–13.33 cough, and drenching night sweats. He also reports general Pa CO 2 (k Pa) 3 4.67–6.00 fatigue and a weight loss of about 10 kg over the past HCO (mmol/L) 19 22–26 5 months. 3 He travels extensively for business and in the past Base excess (mmol/L) -3.8 2 6 months has had work trips to Europe, China, Korea, Japan, Lactate (mmol/L) 1.6 0.5–1.6 Singapore and the United States. He lives with his male partner, denies any recreational drug use and has never smoked tobacco. He was diagnosed with HIV 6 years ago. He says Chest Radiography that 1 month ago his CD 4 was 280 /μL. He is not yet on antiretroviral therapy (ART), nor on co-trimoxazole prophylaxis His chest radiograph is shown in Figure 23.1. or any other regular medications. There is no other significant past medical history. Clinical Findings He is alert, short of breath at rest but able to complete full sentences. Temperature 39.2°C (102.6°F), blood pressure 120 /70 mm Hg, pulse 100 bpm, respiratory rate 26 breaths per minute, s O 87 % on air, and 97 % on 15 L O . Chest 2 2 is clear on auscultation. The rest of the physical examination is unremarkable. Laboratory results His arterial blood gases on air are shown in Table 23.1. His FBC is normal. CRP is 6.7 mg/d L (<5). Creatinine, urea, bilirubin, ALT, AP and albumin are normal. CD 4 150 / μL, HIV viral load 1 500 000 copies/m L (fully sensitive on resistance testing). infiltrates. 61 --- PAGE BREAK -- 62 Questions reaction (PCR) is highly sensitive and specific for detecting Pneumocystis in BAL fluid or induced sputum. However, 1. What further investigations would you perform in order PCR cannot reliably distinguish colonization from active disto confirm the diagnosis? ease, although higher organism loads, as determined by 2. What is your immediate management of the patient? quantitative PCR, likely represent clinically significant disease. CD 4 count should be requested as well. Discussion Answer to Question 2 An HIV-positive man who is not yet on ART presents with What is Your Immediate Management of the progressive shortness of breath, dry cough and drenching Patient? night sweats, with associated significant weight loss. He has a history of extensive work-related travel. He is febrile Correction of hypoxia aiming for oxygen saturation greater with type 1 respiratory failure and bilateral perihilar infil- than 95 % is top priority. Some patients will require CPAP trates seen on chest radiography. Routine laboratory tests or ventilatory support in addition to oxygen therapy. are normal, except for a very slightly elevated CRP, his High-dose co-trimoxazole is first-line treatment for PCP; CD 4-count is low. this may be given IV in severe respiratory failure or if the patient is unable to tolerate oral therapy. In moderate to Answer to Question 1 severe PCP (Table 23.2) corticosteroids should be added. Standard starting dose is prednisolone 40 mg bid or methyl What Further Investigations Would You Perform to prednisolone 30 mg bid, IV if unable to tolerate PO. Confirm the Diagnosis? Pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP) should be high up in the dif The Case continued… ferential of any ART-naïve, HIV-positive patient with a low CD 4 count, who presents with progressive shortness of The patient was treated with high-flow oxygen and started on breath on exertion and dry cough, with patchy perihilar infil- high-dose co-trimoxazole plus prednisolone combined with a trates on the chest radiograph. Tuberculosis, atypical bacte- proton-pump inhibitor. His tachycardia settled with reversal rial pneumonia, cryptococcosis or histoplasmosis should also of his hypoxia and he remained otherwise stable. In view of his be considered. Serum 1,3 β-D-glucan (β-glucan) is fre- multiple recent long-haul flights a computed tomography quently elevated in patients with PCP. Although the β- (CT)-pulmonary angiogram was performed to rule out pulglucan assay has a high sensitivity for PCP, the specificity monary embolism ( of an elevated β-glucan for PCP diagnosis is low because “ground-glass” infiltrates in both lungs, especially in the lower other fungal infections, such as histoplasmosis, some drugs lobes, but no evidence of pulmonary emboli or cavitations. including amoxicillin-clavulanate or piperacillin-tazobactam, Serum β-glucan was >500 pg/m L (<80 pg/m L). and cellulose membranes used for haemodialysis can elevate Bronchoscopy was macroscopically normal. Grocott β-glucan levels. Bronchoscopy and immunofluorescence or staining of BAL fluid revealed Pneumocystis jirovecii cystic Grocott methenamine silver staining of bronchoalveolar forms, and PCR was strongly positive for P. jirovecii lavage (BAL) specimens are the diagnostic tests of choice. DNA. Oxygen was gradually weaned and the patient was dis Ziehl–Neelsen staining of the BAL fluid for acid-fast bacilli charged on oral co-trimoxazole to complete a 21-day total (AFB) should also be requested. Similar staining of induced course. Ten days into PCP treatment, the patient commenced sputum is a less sensitive alternative. Polymerase chain antiretroviral therapy with tenofovir, emtricitabine and TABLE Grading of Severity of Pneumocystis Pneumonia 23.2 Mild Moderate Severe Clinical Increasing exertional Dyspnoea on minimal exertion, Dyspnoea at rest, tachypnoea at rest, persistent features dyspnoea cough and occasional dyspnoea at rest, fever fever, cough sweats sweats Arterial Pa O 2 normal, Sa O 2 falling Pa O 2 ¼ 8.1–11 k Pa Pa O 2 < 8.0 k Pa blood gas on exercise (room air) Chest Normal or minor perihilar Diffuse interstitial shadowing Extensive interstitial shadowing diffuse alveolar radiography infiltrates shadowing (‘white out’), sparing costophrenic angles and apices Source: Farrar, J. et al., 2013. Pneumocystis jirovecii infection, In: Farrar, J., ed. Manson’s Tropical Diseases, 23 rd ed. Elsevier, London. Ch. 39. --- PAGE BREAK -- First-line treatment is with co-trimoxazole, which in severe cases should initially be intravenous. The addition of high-dose corticosteroids in moderate to severe PCP improves outcomes if started within 72 hours of starting specific PCP treatment. In HIVpositive patients co-trimoxazole should be continued for a total of 21 days; in other types of immunosuppression 14 days may be sufficient. Steroids are weaned over 20 days. ART should be started within the first 14 days of PCP treatment in ART-naïve, HIV-positive patients. In resource-limited settings, the diagnosis of PCP is most commonly made on clinical grounds. Differentiating PCP from pulmonary TB is often challenging, and dual infections with both TB and PCP also need to be considered. In the absence of intensive care options severely ill patients may have to be empirically treated for both infections. Co-trimoxazole is often available as an oral formulation only. Adverse effects with co-trimoxazole are common and usually trates, but no pulmonary emboli. occur at 6 to 14 days of treatment, e. g. cytopaenias (40 %), rash (25 %), fever (20 %) and abnormal liver profile (10 %). Second-line efavirenz. Two weeks into PCP treatment,hedeveloped a wide- treatment is with primaquine and clindamycin or IV pentamidine. spread pruritic maculopapular rash most likely attributable to For mild-to-moderate cases, dapsone-trimethoprim or atovaquone may be given. either co-trimoxazole or efavirenz. As a result, co-trimoxazole In resource-limited settings alternative treatments are was changed to clindamycin and primaquine for the final week mostly unavailable. In case of a mild rash, the only option of treatment and efavirenz was replaced by a boosted protease may be desensitization with cautious re-exposure to coinhibitor. After completing PCP treatment, he was started on trimoxazole. dapsone and pyrimethamine for secondary prophylaxis. Secondary prophylaxis with co-trimoxazole (480 mg or 960 mg od) should be given until a CD 4 count over 200 /μL SUMMARY BOX has been maintained for at least 3 months after commencing ART. In some resource-limited tropical countries, co-trimoxazole is Pneumocystis Pneumonia (PCP) continued life-long. P. jirovecii, a fungus found worldwide, causes Pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP) in immunocompromised individuals. Classic Further Reading symptoms are sub-acute onset of malaise, non-productive cough and progressive exertional dyspnoea; fever may also be present. On examination, desaturation on exertion is the classic sign; this is 1. Miller RF, Doffman S. Pneumocystis jirovecii infection. In: Farrar J, a useful clinical test in resource- limited settings because it is easy editor. Manson’s Tropical Disease. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; to perform using a simple pulse oximeter. 2013 [ The chest is often clear on auscultation. Complications include 2. Miller RF, Huang L, Walzer PD. Pneumocystis pneumonia associrespiratory failure and pneumothorax. Without treatment, PCP is ated with human immunodeficiency virus. Clin Chest Med progressive and usually fatal. 2013;34(2):229–41. Grading of severity at presentation guides management 3. Chiliza N, Du Toit M, Wasserman S. Outcomes of HIV-associated decisions (Table 23.2). Diagnosis is by visualizing P. jirovecii on BAL fluid (>90 % sensitivity, and sensitivity maintained up to pneumocystis pheumonia at a South African referral hospital. PLo S ONE 2018;13(8):e 0201733. 10 days into treatment). Induced sputum has lower sensitivity (50–90 %). PCR of respiratory secretions cannot reliably distin- 4. Stover DE, Greeno RA, Gagliardi AJ. The Use of a simple exercise guish infection from colonization. Chest imaging can support the test for the diagnosis of Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia in patients diagnosis, but changes are non-specific and the chest radiograph with AIDS. Am Rev Respir Dis 1989;139:1343–6. may be normal. The classic finding is of diffuse perihilar interstitial 5. Church JA, Fitzgerald F, Walker AS, et al. The expanding role of infiltrates. High-resolution CT scan may show diffuse or patchy co-trimoxazole in developing countries. Lancet Infect Dis “ground-glass” infiltrates. A normal CT scan has a high negative 2015;15:327–39. predictive value for PCP.