25 A 72-Year-Old Male Farmer from Laos With Extensive Skin Lesions on the Lower Leg GU€ NTHER SLESAK, SAYTHONG INTHALAD AND PAUL N. NEWTON Clinical Presentation History A 72-year-old male farmer is admitted to a provincial hospital in northern Laos with extensive, painful verrucous skin lesions on his left foot and lower leg. Ten years prior, he had a leech bite on the dorsum of his left foot. One week later a small painless red nodule developed at the site of the bite. Over the following years the lesion slowly increased in size; further lesions developed and spread up to his knee. Three days before admission his ankle became painful and swollen. Clinical Findings Vital signs are normal and the patient is afebrile. His left lower leg and foot are grossly swollen ( is hyperaemic and feels hot. There are several cauliflower-like masses and oval plaque-like lesions on his left lower leg and foot. The lesions are partly erythematous, partly fungating and purulent, oozing a bad odour. lesions on his left foot that spread centripetally up to his knee. The left Investigations lower leg is also swollen and hyperaemic. Radiography of the left leg and foot showed no bone involvement. Discussion A male Lao farmer presents with several verrucous, partially Questions fungating skin lesions on his left leg and foot, which have been growing over the past 10 years after a minor trauma. 1. What are the important differential diagnoses? The affected leg has additionally swollen up and become 2. Which diagnostic tests should be done? painful over the previous 3 days. 67 --- PAGE BREAK -- 68 Answer to Question 1 What Are the Important Differential Diagnoses? Chronic verrucous skin lesions can typically be seen in fungal infections such as sporotrichosis (Sporothrix schenckii) and chromoblastomycosis, which is caused by various pigmented fungi. Mycetoma (“Madura Foot”) is a chronic subcutaneous infection caused either by fungi (“eumycetoma”) or actinomycetes (“actinomycetoma”). Fistulating lesions discharging granules are the hallmark feature of madura foot but verrucous manifestations may occur. The colour of the granules may indicate the causing pathogen. Despite being common in other parts of Asia, Mycetoma has rarely been described from Laos. Mycobacterial infections (cutaneous tuberculosis, lepromatous leprosy and infections with atypical mycobacteria) also need to be considered. Cutaneous leishmaniasis can pre sent with verrucous lesions, however it has not been reported in Laos. In HIV-positive patients, Kaposi’s Sarcoma may (100 , oil immersion, wet film). look very similar. Non-infectious causes such as squamous cell carcinoma, sarcoidosis, chronic eczema and psoriasis should be borne and sequencing revealed 100 % similarity with Fonsecaea pedin mind. rosoi, F. monophora and F. nubica. When oral terbinafine Acute localized inflammatory signs are indicative of baccould be obtained this was added (initially 500 mg/d, later terial superinfection or deep vein thrombosis. 750 mg/d) for 9 months and local terbinafine ointment was applied for 6 months. Liver function tests and serum glu Answer to Question 2 cose were monitored during treatment and remained nor Which Diagnostic Tests Should be Done? mal. The lesions healed uneventfully with some residual swelling and hypopigmentation. Direct microscopy of skin scrapings taken from the lesions can help detect pigmented fungi in chromoblastomycosis and may be useful to visualize amastigotes in cutaneous leishmaniasis. SUMMARY BOX Sporotrichosis differs from the other subcutaneous mycoses in that culture is the most reliable mode of diagnosis Chromoblastomycosis because there are few organisms present in lesions and these Chromoblastomycosis is a chronic fungal infection of the skin and may be difficult to find. subcutaneous tissue, most commonly of hands, feet and In leprosy, slit skin smears are fairly easy to obtain; how- lower legs. It is typically caused by traumatic percutaneous ever, for other mycobacterial infections biopsy and/or culture inoculation of the genera Fonsecaea, Phialophora and may be necessary. Cladophialophora which are found in plant debris or forest detritus. Infection occurs worldwide but is most common in rural tropical and subtropical areas. Male agricultural workers are most The Case Continued… commonly affected. Painless lesions develop slowly over years from the site of Secondary bacterial superinfection was suspected and so inoculation as verrucous nodules or plaques, gradually spreading iodine-based antiseptics were applied locally and oral antibi- centripetally by lymphatic or cutaneous dissemination. Typical complications are ulcerations, bacterial superinfection and otics were started, initially cloxacillin and metronidazole. chronic lymphoedema, which may be confused with elephanti After bacterial culture of the pus grew Escherichia coli, antiasis in regions co-endemic with lymphatic filariasis. biotics were changed to co-trimoxazole, guided by suscepti- Diagnosis is made by direct microscopic detection of bility testing. pathognomonic sclerotic cells in skin scrapings (‘Medlar bodies’, Simple direct microscopic investigations of wet film lesion fumagoid or muriform cells). These are brownish, round, thickwalled structures of 4 to 12 μm length, which are already visible scrapings revealed characteristic brownish, round, thickon a simple wet film. Hyphae can be more readily seen on a walled, multiseptate sclerotic cells typical of chromoblastopotassium hydroxide preparation. More sophisticated techniques mycosis ( tion made the fungal cells more readily visible. Antifungal endemic areas and are often reserved for research purposes; but treatment was initiated with itraconazole (400 mg/d for species identification can also guide treatment schemes. Treatment is challenging and effectiveness depends on the 7 days monthly pulse therapy) and surgical debridement causative agent, the clinical form and the severity of the lesions. of all lesions performed. PCR from skin tissue was positive Antifungal therapy commonly comprises oral itraconazole --- PAGE BREAK -- (200–400 mg/d) alone or in combination with terbinafine or 2. Queiroz-Telles F, de Hoog S, Santos DW, et al. Chromoblastomyflucytosine (which may be hard to obtain). Antifungals have to be cosis. Clin Microbiol Rev 2017;30:233–76. given for at least 6 to 12 months and, in advanced stages, for 3. Slesak G, Inthalad S, Strobel M, et al. Chromoblastomycosis after a years to avoid relapse. Cure rates range from 15 % to 80 %. Multi- leech bite complicated by myiasis: a case report. BMC Infect Dis drug therapy seems more effective but is expensive. Itraconazole 2011;11:14. pulse therapy (7 d/month) is cost-saving. 4. Agarwal R, Singh G, Ghosh A, et al. Chromoblastomycosis in In addition, topical heat therapy, phototherapy, cryosurgery, India: review of 169 cases. PLo S Negl Trop Dis 2017;11(8): surgical debridement and/or combination therapy may be helpful. e 0005534. 5. Coelho RA, Brito-Santos F, Figueiredo-Carvalho MHG, et al. Further Reading Molecular identification and antifungal susceptibility profiles of clinical strains of Fonsecaea spp. isolated from patients with chro 1. Hay RJ. Fungal infections. In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical moblastomycosis in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. PLo S Negl Trop Dis Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 [chapter 38]. 2018;12:e 0006675.