26 A 14-Year-Old Boy from Malawi Who Has Been Bitten by a Snake GREGOR POLLACH Clinical Presentation History A 14-year-old Malawian boy presents to a local hospital because of an extensive necrotic wound on his right foot. Three weeks earlier he was playing with his friends on a path leading through rocky grassland to the maize field of his family when he stepped on a snake. The snake was brown with V-shaped black bands on its back, and it was approximately one metre long. His friends told his mother later that the snake had hissed loudly but did not move away before biting him – which the boy did not even realize, being busy chasing a football. Shortly after the bite, haemorrhagic bullae formed on the right leg. His gums started to bleed and he vomited extensively. He was taken to a local traditional 3 weeks after a snake bite. healer for treatment. His bleeding and vomiting settled; however, he developed intense pain and swelling at the site of the bite. TABLE Laboratory Results on Admission 26.1 Clinical Findings Parameter Patient Reference Range WBC ( 109 /L) 19 4–10 14-year old boy, who appears weak and is in respiratory distress. Temperature 39.4°C, pulse 126 bpm, blood pressure Haemoglobin (mg/d L) 9.5 12–14 85 /60 mm Hg, respiratory rate 30 breath cycles per minute. Platelets ( 109 /L) 60 150–400 There is an extensive, foul-smelling necrosis affecting his K+ (mmol/L) 4.2 3.5–5.2 right foot and ankle where the tendons are exposed ( to bend the ankle of his right foot. The inguinal lymph nodes Questions are enlarged on the right side. The urine is clear, rectal exam does not show any signs of 1. Which snake most probably caused this bite? bleeding and upon provoked coughing there is no haemop 2. What first-aid measures should have been taken? tysis. Fundoscopy is normal. Discussion Investigations A 14-year-old boy from rural Malawi who was bitten by a The 20-minute whole blood clotting test (WBCT 20) is nor- snake 3 weeks earlier presents to a local hospital. He is septic mal. The results of the other blood tests are shown in with an extensive foul-smelling necrotic wound on the right 70 --- PAGE BREAK -- Answer to Question 1 it should be taken to the healthcare facility for identification. Which Snake Was Most Probably Responsible for Even a dead snake needs to be handled with great caution as the Bite? it still may bite by reflex. Smart-phone photography of the The African puff-adder (Bitis arietans) is the most likely culprit snake is another alternative. Some widely popular first-aid measures have never been snake to have caused his bite. Puff-adders are about one metre long and stout. They show a distinctive ‘V’ or ‘U’ pat- proven to be of any help in the management of snake bites; these include local cuts with a knife or razor blade, tern on their back. When disturbed, they behave aggresattempts to suck the venom out of the wound, the often sively, hissing loudly and inflating their body. The puffdisastrous application of an arterial tourniquet, cauterizaadder is a highly dangerous snake, with large quantities of tion, chemicals, ice, electric shocks and the use of ‘magic a potent venom and long fangs. It commonly lives in densely stones’. populated areas. Throughout the African savannah, this species is responsible for a large number of serious bites. The main problem is massive local swelling, which may spread to involve the whole limb and cause hypovolaemic shock. The Case Continued… Bullae filled with haemorrhagic fluid may develop at the site of the bite. Extensive necrosis may occur. Cardiotoxic effects The snake bite had occurred 3 weeks earlier, therefore appliof the venom may lead to arrhythmias, and the venom may cation of antivenom was not deemed useful. Because the boy cause systemic haemorrhage. was septic upon admission, he was managed according to the The puff-adder, along with the saw-scaled or carpet viper international sepsis treatment guidelines, crucially including (Echis species), which produces similar symptoms, are early start of broad-spectrum antibiotics, ‘ventilatory supresponsible for most fatalities after snake bites in Africa. In port’ and fluid resuscitation. He also received tetanus contrast, bites by mambas, the most feared snakes in Africa, prophylaxis. are relatively uncommon. The wound was managed surgically: After several debridements ( cessfully performed. Further reconstructive surgery was not Answer to Question 2 necessary and severe local complications (e. g. compartment What First-Aid Measures Should Have Been Taken? syndrome, deep tissue infection and ischaemia) did not develop. The boy was discharged several weeks later. Some First-aid should include reassurance of the victim. Paracetafunctional impairment of his right foot remained and he mol should be used for pain relief because aspirin might was booked for outpatient physiotherapy. aggravate haemorrhage and morphine can enhance respiratory depression caused by the venom. Any tight jewellery should be removed. The affected limb should be immobilized along with the whole patient, because any muscular contractions will increase the absorption of the venom. If a neurotoxic venom cannot be excluded, a pressure immobilization technique should be used; e. g. a long elastic bandage can be wrapped around the affected limb incorporating a splint. However, in cytotoxic venoms the local effects may be worsened through such pressure techniques. The wound itself should be left alone to avoid infection and absorption of the venom. The patient should gently but quickly be taken to the nearest appropriate health facility. Patients should be placed in a recovery position if vomiting or if their level of consciousness is reduced. All patients bitten by snakes should ideally be observed in hospital for at least 24 hours. Finally, helpers should not try to kill the snake, risking further bites. However, if the snake has already been killed --- PAGE BREAK -- 72 TABLE Principal Effects of African Snake Venoms in Humans 26.2 Venom Activity Clinical Manifestations African Snake Responsible Cytotoxic Massive local swelling, blistering, necrosis; plasma Puff-adder and other large Bitis species, extravasation with consecutive fluid loss, hypotension. saw-scaled vipers (Echis), burrowing asps Eye: keratoconjunctivitis, corneal ulcer, blindness (spitting (Atractaspis species); spitting cobra cobra) Auto- Release of vasoactive compounds (e. g. NO, histamine, Burrowing asps (Atractaspis spp.), Bitis species, pharmacological serotonin, bradykinin); anaphylaxis, acute profound boomslang hypotension, urticaria, vomiting, diarrhoea Haematotoxic Spontaneous systemic bleeding (gums, brain, Puff-adder and other large Bitis spp., saw-scaled gastrointestinal, uterine), bleeding from trauma and recent vipers, boomslang, vine snake wounds Cardiotoxic Hypotension, shock, arrhythmias, conduction abnormalities Puff-adder and other large Bitis species, burrowing asps Neurotoxic Cranial nerve palsies, bulbar and respiratory paralysis Elapids (mamba, cobra, rinkhals) berg adder, Peringuey’s adder Myotoxic Trismus; rhabdomyolysis with myalgias, myoglobinuria, renal Sea snake failure, hyperkalaemia, respiratory failure Nephrotoxic Acute kidney injury, renal necrosis Boomslang, vine snake, saw-scaled vipers Source: After Warrell, 20133 it therefore may lead to severe side effects including fever, anaphylaxis or late serum sickness-like reactions. SUMMARY BOX Necrotic wounds require careful debridement. Wound infection, compartment syndrome or osteomyelitis must be suspected and treated early. Skin grafts, reconstructive surgery, fasciotomy Snake Bite or amputation may be necessary. Massive local oedema carries Snake bite is a common problem in rural areas of many tropical the risk of hypovolaemic shock. countries. The true numbers are unknown because many patients In severe haemorrhagic complications with hypotension, may never reach a health facility or seek the help of a traditional patients should be transfused; if blood is unavailable, sufficient IV practitioner. Snake bites are most common among farm workers, fluids should be administered. herdsmen, plantation workers and their children. Most bites occur For neurotoxic complications mechanical ventilation is often at the beginning of the rainy season. Even though there is a large required and anticholinesterase drugs should be attempted. variety of venomous snakes, the toxic effects of snake bites can be classified into one or more of seven groups (Table 26.2). The therapeutic approach in hospital has to consider local and systemic effects of the bite and the complications that might arise. Tetanus prophylaxis, antibiotic coverage, wound cleansing and Further Reading sterile dressing are mandatory. Antivenom should be given in case of systemic envenoming, 1. Warrell DA. Venomous and poisonous animals. In: Farrar J, editor. indicated by clinical signs and symptoms or deranged laboratory Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 parameters. [ Of note, loosening of tourniquets or improvement of circulation may lead to an increased systemic load of venom. In severe local 2. Warrell DA. Treatment of bites by adders and exotic venomous envenoming, antivenom should be given if the swelling involves snakes. BMJ 2005;331(7527):1244–7. more than half of the bitten limb and in patients bitten by snakes 3. Warrell DA. Venomous and other dangerous animals. known to cause local necrosis. In: Mabey D, Gill G, Parry E, et al., editors. Principles of Medicine Antivenom is most effective when administered by slow IV in Africa. 4 th ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 2013. injection or infusion. Children need the same dose of antivenom p. 849–74. as adults because the same amount of venom has been injected. 4. Dellinger RP, Levy MM, Rhodes A, et al. Surviving sepsis cam Antivenom mostly consists of non-human hyperimmunoglobulin; paign: international guidelines for management of severe sepsis and septic shock: 2012. Crit Care Med 2013;41(2):580–637.