28 A 67-Year-Old Female Expatriate Living in Cameroon With Eosinophilia and Pericarditis SEBASTIAN DIECKMANN AND RALF IGNATIUS Clinical Presentation TABLE History Full Blood Count Results at Presentation 28.1 A 67-year-old German woman who has lived as an expatriate Parameter Patient Reference in Cameroon for the past 4 years presents with palpitations at WBC ( 109 /L) 6.20 4–10 a tropical medicine clinic in Germany. She also reports transient subcutaneous swellings for the past year. There is no Haemoglobin (g/d L) 13.8 12–15 history of fever or constitutional symptoms and the past Platelets ( 109 /L) 155 150–450 medical history is otherwise unremarkable. Neutrophils (%) 45 20–50 24-hour ECG recording was done elsewhere, which showed paroxysmal supraventricular extrasystoles. Echocar- Eosinophils (%) 14 0–6 diography revealed a minimal pericardial effusion. Absolute eosinophil count 0.868 <0.45 ( 109 /L) Band neutrophils (%) 1 0–5 Clinical Findings Lymphocytes (%) 36 20–40 Vital signs are normal and the patient is afebrile. There are no Monocytes (%) 4 0–10 visible subcutaneous swellings. Heart sounds are clear and regular, and there are no murmurs. No pathological findings Basophils (%) 0 0–2 are noted on physical examination. Discussion Laboratory Results A 67-year-old expatriate living in Cameroon for 4 years pre Full blood count results are shown in Table 28.1. sents with eosinophilia and reports transient subcutaneous swellings. Additionally, the patient suffers from cardiac arrhythmia. Further Investigations The chest radiograph does not show any abnormalities. Answer to Question 1 What Are the Key Findings? Questions The pattern of transient subcutaneous swellings, eosinophilia and the history of living in Cameroon for several years are the 1. What are the key findings? key pieces of clinical information suggestive of a filarial 2. What are your differential diagnoses? infection. 76 --- PAGE BREAK -- Some filarial infections may affect the heart, and chronic 3000 8000 AEC/µL eosinophilia is known to be cardiotoxic and may cause endo- Therapy myocardial fibrosis. The cardiac findings in this patient, 6000 2000 however, may warrant further work-up. 4000 Answer to Question 2 2000 What Are the Differential Diagnoses? 0 The differentials of skin swellings and eosinophilia include non-specific urticaria, Calabar swellings in loiasis, cysticercosis, larva currens in Strongyloides stercoralis infection and infection with Mansonella perstans. Acute schistosomiasis (Katayama syndrome) may present with eosinophilia, fever and an urticarial rash; however, this patient is afebrile and the migratory swellings she describes declined ( do not fit the clinical picture of schistosomiasis. pitations settled. Gnathostomiasis and sparganosis may also cause eosino- Follow-up echocardiography 3 months later was normal, philia and migratory swellings; however, these infections the pericardial effusion had resolved and 24-hour ECG was are more common in East Asia than in Africa. Sparganosis also normal. has been reported from Kenya and Tanzania and gnathosto- Loiasis and other conditions causing high eosinophil miasis occurs in the Okavango Delta, Botswana. counts have been implicated in the development of endomyocardial fibrosis; however, it remains unclear in this case The Case Continued… whether there was any association between the infection and the patient’s transient cardiac problems. Serology for filarial infections was positive. Day-blood samples were collected, filtered and stained with Giemsa, which revealed sheathed microfilariae with a tapered tail characteristic for Loa loa ( perstans, another filarial nematode endemic in West and Central Africa, which may cause similar symptoms, would have been smaller and unsheathed with a blunt tail. The microfilarial count was 1400 /m L. Despite the low microfilarial count the patient was treated with caution, first with albendazole followed by ivermectin. Therapy was tolerated well. The absolute eosinophil count (AEC) returned to normal and the microfilarial count nuclei are extending into the tip of the tail. (Giemsa staining; magnification 200 ) AEC/µL microfilariae/m L Lm/eairaliforcim 1000 0 08.11. 14.11. 21.11. 26.11. 03.12. 10.12. 14.12. 25.03. 13.08. count (AEC) in the patient after treatment. TABLE Treatment of Loiasis Matched to Levels of 28.2 Microfilaraemia (After Boussinesq 2012) Level of Microfilaraemia Recommended Drug Regimen High Albendazole 200 mg bd for 21 days, (>8000 mfa/m L) followed by ivermectin 150μg/kg stat, then DEC at slowly increasing doses. Moderate (2000– Ivermectin 150 μg/kg stat, repeat after 8000 mf/m L) 1–3 months until microfilaraemia is <2000 mf/m L, this is followed by treatment with DEC. Low DEC: start with low doses of 3–6 mg/d if (<2000 mf/m L) there are parasites in the blood, 50 mg/ d if amicrofilaraemic, divided into 2–3 doses. The dose is doubled every day up to 400 mg/d, still divided into 2–3 doses. Start treatment in hospital. Oral antihistamines or corticosteroids may be useful during the first days of treatment to reduce side effects (arthralgias, pruritus, headache, fever). Several 3- to 4-week courses of DEC administered at intervals of 2–3 weeks may be required to achieve a complete cure. mfa ¼ microfilariae. --- PAGE BREAK -- 78 For treatment of loiasis, diethylcarbamazine (DEC), ivermectin and albendazole are used. DEC is effective against microfilariae of SUMMARY BOX L. loa and also kills a proportion of the adult worms. It has long been considered the drug of choice for the treatment of loiasis; however, it may cause severe side effects in patients with high Loiasis levels of microfilariae. Furthermore, DEC is difficult to access in Loiasis is the symptomatic infection with the filarial nematode L. non-endemic countries and repeated courses of treatment may loa. It is common in West and Central Africa. The infective larvae of be required for final cure. L. loa are transmitted by female Chrysops species horseflies. Ivermectin is only microfilaricidal, and albendazole may have Inside the human host larvae develop into adult worms, which embryostatic activity; however, the precise mechanism of action takes several months. Adult L. loa migrate through the and the nature and degree of its effect on adult L. loa remain to be subcutaneous and connective tissues of the human body. elucidated. Migration may cause urticaria and transient painless subcutane- In contrast to other filarial nematodes (e. g. O. volvulus, ous swellings (‘Calabar swellings’), a localized angioedema which W. bancrofti), L. loa does not harbour any endosymbiotic may last from several hours to a few days. Wolbachia bacteria. Therefore there is no role for doxycycline in Adult worms may be spotted when migrating through the the treatment of loiasis. bulbar conjunctiva, which is noticed by the patient as intense When patients with high microfilarial counts are treated with itching of the eye, pain and photophobia. Passage of the DEC or ivermectin, the rapid death of microfilariae can lead to palpebral conjunctiva is associated with swelling of the eyelid and severe side effects, including glomerulonephritis, encephalopathe periorbital region. thy, coma or death. Sequential treatment has therefore been Loiasis may cause renal complications (glomerulonephritis, suggested, depending on the degree of microfilaraemia nephrotic syndrome, etc.) and a wide range of neurological (Table 28.2). symptoms. To safely administer ivermectin in the context of mass drug The female worms release sheathed microfilariae that are treatment campaigns for onchocerciasis or lymphatic filariasis in detectable in the peripheral blood during daytime with a peak regions co-endemic with L. loa, a mobile phone–based videoaround noon, but are usually absent at night. This diurnal microscope has proven useful as a point-of-care device to identify periodicity corresponds to the day-biting habits of the Chrysops people with high levels of L. loa microfilariae under field conditions vectors. and postpone their ivermectin treatment. Microfilaraemia in L. loa infection tends to be higher than in lymphatic filariasis, where microfilariaemia is usually betweeen Further Reading 1 and 1000 mf/ml. However, there is also a high percentage of amicrofilaraemic individuals (‘occult loiasis’) in endemic areas, which poses a diagnostic challenge. 1. Simonsen P, Fischer PU, Hoerauf A, et al. The filariases. Manson’s Clinical diagnosis in loiasis relies on the typical passage of the Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 [ adults through the bulbar conjunctiva (‘eye worm’). 2. Boussinesq M. Loiasis. Ann Trop Med Parasitol 2006;100:715–31. Microfilariae of L. loa may be detected in a thick blood film or 3. Boussinesq M. Loiasis: new epidemiologic insights and proposed filtered blood using day-blood samples. PCR (polymerase chain treatment strategy. J Trav Med 2012;19(3):140–3. reaction) is currently the best diagnostic method for amicrofilar- 4. D’Ambrosio MV, Bakalar M, Bennuru S, et al. Point-of-care quanaemic patients with occult loiasis. Serology has to be interpreted tification of blood-borne filarial parasites with a mobile phone with caution. Serological tests for L. loa are usually based on antigens derived from another filarial species, e. g. Dirofilaria microscope. Sci Tranl Med 2015;286:1–10. immitis. Therefore serology is unable to distinguish between the 5. Metzger WG, Mordmueller B. Loa loa – does it deserve to be different filarial diseases. Furthermore, cross-reactions with neglected? Lancet Infect Dis 2014;14:353–7. antibodies against other nematodes are common.