31 A 6-Year-Old Boy from Malawi With Fever, Cough and Impaired Consciousness CHARLOTTE ADAMCZICK Answer to Question 1 Clinical Presentation What is Your Differential Diagnosis? History The symptoms and signs are rather non-specific and the list You review a 6-year-old boy in the paediatric high depen- of differential diagnoses is long, ranging from malaria and dency unit of a Malawian Central Hospital. The boy was typhoid fever to atypical pneumonia and various viral infecadmitted the night before because of high fever, dyspnoea tions. Also a combination of different diagnoses has to be and a dry cough which had started 3 days before. On admis- considered, given his state of immunosuppression. sion, he was started on presumptive antimalarial treatment; However, the boy shows the three ‘Cs’ of “cough, the results of the malaria smear are pending. coryza and conjunctivitis”. Together with his rather con The boy is known to be HIV-positive but is not yet on spicuous rash starting behind his ears, measles should be antiretroviral therapy (ART). suspected. Bright red spots with a whitish centre (‘Koplik’s spots’) on the buccal mucosa would be pathognomonic; however, they Clinical Findings may be absent, or may appear only for a short period of time. Other viral infections presenting with a similar rash are Examination reveals a sick child with a temperature of rubella, enterovirus infection and infectious mononucleosis. 39.8°C (103.6°F) and laboured breathing. The Blantyre Bacterial infections to consider include scarlet fever, menincoma score is 3 /5. The boy has coryza and bilateral conjuncgococcal disease and rickettsial infections. tivitis. Behind both ears and on the forehead, you notice a fine maculopapular rash that has not been described before. Answer to Question 2 There is bilateral axillary lymphadenopathy. What Complications Should You Expect and How Do You Manage the Patient? Questions Complications in measles are much more common in individuals with cellular immune defects than in the immuno 1. What is your differential diagnosis? competent. Severe diarrhoea, septicaemia, giant cell 2. What complications do you expect and how do you manpneumonia, superimposed bacterial pneumonia, encephaliage the child? tis, otitis media and corneal ulcerations can complicate the course of disease. In this case, with a reduced Blantyre Coma Discussion Scale and laboured breathing, encephalitis and pulmonary involvement have to be considered. An HIV-positive Malawian boy presents with high fever, dry Because the rash in this boy has only just appeared, he is cough, coryza, conjunctivitis and impaired level of constill contagious and needs to be isolated and nursed in a sciousness together with a fine maculopapular rash on the separate room. neck and face. 85 --- PAGE BREAK -- 86 immunocompromised, which occurs a few months after the acute measles infection. A late complication after several years is subacute severe sclerosing panencephalitis (SSPE), which is invariably fatal. SSPE has an incidence of one in 10 000 to one in a million cases of measles. The Case Fatality Rate (CFR) in well-resourced settings is around 0.3 per 1000 whereas worldwide CFRs range between 3 and 5 % and up to 30 % in refugee settings. More than 95 % of deaths occur in developing countries, mostly in children below the age of 5 years old. There is no specific antiviral treatment. In developing countries, all children with measles should receive vitamin A supplementation, which prevents blindness and death. Vaccination or application of human immunoglobulin within 6 days of exposure may help protect non-vaccinated contacts. Routine measles vaccination of children is recommended by WHO. Recent adaptations in international vaccination schedules The Case Continued… are recommending measles vaccination in infants of 9 months of age. Almost 100 % of children vaccinated with two doses of the safe live measles vaccine will have protective immunity. However, The boy required IV fluids, and vitamin A was given for corsince measles is highly contagious, around 95 % of a population neal protection. Malaria treatment was stopped as smears need to be vaccinated to preserve herd immunity. turned out to be negative. Within the next 3 days, the rash Asymptomatic and not severely immunocompromised chilcovered the trunk and skin scaling started over the chest dren with HIV should receive measles vaccine because the risk of ( the vaccine. In severely immunocompromised persons with HIV, received antibiotic treatment. After recovery, antiretroviral ART should be started and measles vaccination should be therapy was started in the out-patient-clinic. delayed until immune reconstitution. However, immune response may be hampered in HIV-positive individuals, particularly if the SUMMARY BOX viral load is high at the time of vaccination. Measles Further Reading Measles is a highly contagious viral infection, caused by a paramyxovirus and transmitted through droplets. The course of the 1. Munoz FM. Viral exanthemas. In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropdisease is strongly influenced by both nutritional and immune ical Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 [ status of the affected individual. 2. Maldonado A, Shetty A. Rubeola Virus: Measles and Subacute Scle Despite the availability of a highly effective vaccine, large measles outbreaks continue to occur worldwide. After an incu- rosing Panencephalitis. In: Long S, editor. Pediatric Infectious Disbation period of 8 to 12 days, the non-specific prodromal stage eases. 5 th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018 [ presents with fever, conjunctivitis, rhinitis and cough, followed 3. Mekki M, Ely B, Hardie D, et al. Subacute sclerosing panencephaafter a few days by a maculopapular rash, evolving behind the litis: clinical phenotype, epidemiology, and preventive intervenears and in the face, spreading over the trunk and limbs. Severe tions. Dev Med Child Neurol 2019;61(10):1139–44. https:// desquamation of the skin may develop during the course of the doi. org/10.1111 /dmcn.14166. illness. The patient is highly contagious from about 4 days before 4. Haban H, Benchekroun S, Sadeq M, et al. Seroprevalence of meauntil up to 4 days after the appearance of the exanthema. sles vaccine antibody response in vertically HIV-infected children in Immunocompromised individuals may not show the rash (‘white measles’), nevertheless they are highly vulnerable to Morocco. BMC Infect Dis 2018;18:680. https://doi. org/10.1186 / developing complications. Furthermore, a sub-acute ‘inclusion- s 12879-018-3590-y. body’ encephalitis has been described in the