32 A 44-Year-Old Male Farmer from Laos With Diabetes and a Back Abscess SAYAPHET RATTANAVONG, VALY KEOLUANGKHOT, SIHO SISOUPHONH, VATTHANAPHONE LATTHAPHASAVANG, DAVID A. B. DANCE AND CAOIMHE NIC FHOGARTAIGH Clinical Presentation History A 44-year-old male rice farmer presents to a provincial hospital in Southern Laos in the rainy season with a 1-month history of fever, headache, generalized myalgia and arthralgia and a painful swelling over the left scapula. The swelling has gradually increased in size, without any history of preceding trauma. He has not noticed any lesions elsewhere. He was diagnosed with type 2 diabetes 4 years previously but was not compliant with oral antidiabetic drugs or follow-up. The lesion on his back was incised and drained at a local health centre the previous week, since when he has been tak- ing cloxacillin 1 g four times daily. However, there has been age of the abscess. (Side finding: hypopigmented macular skin lesions of no improvement and during the 2 days prior to admission he Pityriasis versicolor (Malassezia spp.), commonly seen in humid tropical has deteriorated, with high fever, chills and severe malaise. climates.) Clinical Findings TABLE The patient appears septic, with a fever of 40°C (104°F), a 32.1 Laboratory Results heart rate of 136 bpm, blood pressure of 140 /80 mm Hg and Reference a respiratory rate of 30 breath cycles per minute. He is pale Parameter Patient Range and jaundiced. In the left scapular region, there is an erythematous swelling of 2.5 4 cm with pus discharging from WBC ( 109 /L) 16.2 6.0–8.0 a central wound ( Polymorphs (%) 92.1 45–70 nopathy. On chest auscultation there are bilateral crepitations and reduced breath sounds at both lung bases. Heart Haemoglobin (g/d L) 12.5 12.0–16.0 sounds are normal. The abdomen is soft, without any palpa- Platelets ( 109 /L) 112 150–300 ble organomegaly. Glucose (mmol/L) 20.6 4.1–6.1 Serum creatinine (μmol/L) 56 62–120 Laboratory Results Urea (mmol/L) 6.8 5.4–16.1 The laboratory results are shown in Table 32.1. AST (U/L) 131 0–37 ALT (U/L) 83 0–40 Questions Serum total bilirubin (μmol/L) 111.2 1.71–20.5 1. What are your differential diagnoses? Serum direct bilirubin (μmol/L) 56.4 0–7 2. What additional investigations would you like to do? 87 --- PAGE BREAK -- 88 Discussion A male Lao rice famer presents during the rainy season with prolonged fever, jaundice, a back abscess and chest signs. He is a known type 2 diabetic but has been non-adherent to his antidiabetic medication. Answer to Question 1 What Are Your Differential Diagnoses? Bacterial abscess with sepsis may be caused by Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus pyogenes or other Streptococcus species, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Vibrio vulnificus or anaerobes. This patient, however, has epidemiological and clinical risk factors for melioidosis, caused by Burkholderia pseudomallei. This may cause a spectrum of disease in immunocompromised patients, especially diabetics, ranging from localized abscesses to pneumonia and septicaemia with disseminated abscess formation and high mortality. There is often no history of an inoculation injury or trauma. Tuberculosis should also be considered with the sub-acute pleural effusions. history of abscess with respiratory findings; however, tuberculous abscesses are usually ‘cold’, without much pain, ery- The patient was empirically treated with ceftriaxone and thema or warmth. gentamicin while awaiting the culture results. Treatment was Disseminated fungal infection seems unlikely but would switched to ceftazidime after 48 hours when the laboratory be possible if there was additional immunocompromise such alerted the clinicians to the suspicion of melioidosis. The as HIV. patient improved after 7 days of treatment and was afebrile by day 14, when he was switched to oral co-trimoxazole to Answer to Question 2 complete 20 weeks. Glycaemic control was established. What Additional Investigations Would You Like No other foci of infection were detected by locally available to Do? investigations. The patient was discharged after 21 days of hospitalization and continued on oral ‘eradication’ treatment Essential investigations include blood culture and abscess for 5 months. He remains well. swab (or deep pus) for microscopy and culture. A throat swab, or sputum sample if there is pulmonary involvement, may also be cultured on selective media, such as Ashdown’s SUMMARY BOX agar. A chest radiograph (CXR) should be done looking for Melioidosis evidence of pneumonia or pleural effusion. An ultrasound of the abdomen, or other imaging such as CT or MRI scan, Melioidosis is an infectious disease caused by B. pseudomallei, an environmental saprophyte endemic to South and South-east should also be considered, because the findings of liver Asia and northern Australia. The disease is being described with and splenic abscesses would strongly support a diagnosis of increasing frequency both in non-endemic and in endemic areas. melioidosis while culture results are awaited. Biochemistry This may be because of a combination of greater awareness, assays to check glucose and creatinine are important to opti- improving laboratory facilities and research and possibly also as a mize glycaemic control and adjust drug dosage respectively. result of a genuine increase in incidence. A modelling study has estimated 165,000 human melioidosis cases with 89,000 deaths Depending on the CXR findings, sputum, pleural fluid per year worldwide making it a significant neglected tropical and pus may be sent for staining for acid-fast bacilli (e. g. disease (NTD), even though it does not feature on the WHO’s list Ziehl–Neelsen stain) and M. tuberculosis-PCR (e. g. Xpert of NTDs. MTB/RIF). North-eastern Thailand and northern Australia are highly endemic areas, where B. pseudomallei is an important cause of community-acquired sepsis and pneumonia. It is probably widely The Case Continued… distributed elsewhere outside the endemic region and may be greatly underdiagnosed. Pus culture yielded B. pseudomallei after 48 hours, and later Humans are thought usually to become infected by percutahis blood culture also grew the same bacterium. Three throat neous inoculation through cuts and abrasions (e. g. when working swabs were cultured on selective media but failed to grow the in rice fields), inhalation/aspiration during severe weather events and ingestion (e. g. ingestion of contaminated and unchlorinated organism. The CXR revealed bilateral pleural effusions water supplies), although it is often difficult to determine precisely ( the mode of acquisition. Host factors are very important; the bony involvement. Abdominal ultrasound showed hepatos- majority of cases occur in those who are immunocompromised, plenomegaly without evidence of liver or splenic abscesses. especially with diabetes mellitus, but also alcoholism, chronic lung --- PAGE BREAK -- disease, chronic renal disease, thalassaemia, steroid use, Parenteral antibiotics (e. g. ceftazidime, meropenem) are immunosuppressive therapy and cancer, but surprisingly not HIV usually given for 2 weeks in the acute phase, followed by oral infection. The disease is highly seasonal, with 80 % of cases co-trimoxazole to complete 3 to 6 months eradication therapy presenting during the wet season. to minimize risk of relapse. For patients unable to take Clinical presentation varies from benign localized infection to co-trimoxazole, co-amoxiclav is an alternative but has higher rapidly progressive septicaemia. The bacteraemic form accounts relapse rates. Supportive treatment of sepsis and surgical for 40 % to 60 % of cases; and over half present with pneumonia, drainage of abscesses, as well as control of predisposing factors which carries a case fatality rate of 10 % to 40 %. The lethality is are also critical in optimizing outcome. even higher in resource-poor settings where there is limited access to early diagnosis, appropriate antibiotic treatment and intensive care facilities. The organism may localize in the lungs, liver, spleen, prostate, parotid, skin and soft tissue, bones and Further Reading joints, or the central nervous system, causing abscesses and granulomas; but approximately 10 % to 15 % of bacteraemic cases have no evident clinical focus. It is important to use available 1. Dance DB. Melioidosis. In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical imaging to identify the extent of infection and monitor the course of Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2014 [ treatment. The confirmation of the diagnosis of melioidosis is 2. Currie BJ. Melioidosis: evolving concepts in epidemiology, pathobased on the isolation and identification of B. pseudomallei in genesis, and treatment. Seminars in respiratory and critical care clinical samples, and in endemic areas it may be possible to medicine 2015;36(1):111–25. reduce the time to diagnosis using immunofluorescence and lat 3. Limmathurotsakul D, Golding N, Dance DA, et al. Predicted eral flow immunoassay on clinical specimens, and B. pseudoglobal distribution of Burkholderia pseudomallei and burden of mallei antigen latex agglutination on isolates. Serology has melioidosis. Nat Microbiol 2016;1(1):15008. relatively low sensitivity and specificity with high rates of background seropositivity in those living in endemic regions. PCR 4. Wiersinga WJ, Virk HS, Torres AG, et al. Melioidosis. Nat Rev Dis assays on clinical specimens, aiming to provide a more rapid Primers 2018;4:17107. diagnosis, showed high specificity however the sensitivity on 5. Dance D. Treatment and prophylaxis of melioidosis. Int J Antimiblood specimens depends on adequate bacterial concentration. crob Agents 2014;43(4):310–8.