41 A 7-Year-Old Girl from West Africa With Two Skin Ulcers and a Contracture of Her Right Wrist MORITZ VOGEL Clinical Presentation Discussion History A 7-year-old West African girl presents with two progressive cutaneous ulcers linked by an area of altered skin. The move A 7-year-old girl is presented to a district hospital in the tropment in the associated joint is restricted. General symptoms ical region of a West African country. After an insect bite, she are limited to a mildly elevated temperature. developed an itchy papule on the back of her right hand, which enlarged over a period of 3 months. A traditional Answer to Question 1 healer had prescribed herbal remedies. When the lesion ulcerated a few weeks later, diclofenac and dexamethasone What is the Most Likely Diagnosis and What is the were administered at the local health post. When a second Differential Diagnosis? lesion appeared, treatment with oxacillin was initiated with The geographical region of West Africa, the young age of the no effect. The girl became increasingly unable to use her patient, the location of the lesion on the extremities, the right hand. There is no history of relevant trauma or systemic absence of major trauma and the clinical picture lead to a sussymptoms. pected diagnosis diagnosis of Buruli ulcer (BU). The history of an insect bite is an incidental finding, the mode of transmission of the causative organism, Mycobacterium ulcerans, Clinical Findings remains unknown. Pain and low-grade fever as seen in this case may also be A 7-year-old, anxious girl in good general condition holding her right wrist in a 45° flexion and 20° abduction position. explained by bacterial superinfection. A careful history and Pulse 108 bpm (normal 70–110), blood pressure 100 / physical examination will provide guidance in differentiating 70 mm Hg, temperature 37.9°C (100.2°F). numerous other infectious (bacterial, viral, fungal, parasitic) and non-infectious (trauma, envenoming, autoimmune, Two skin ulcers are present on the back of her right hand (3 3 cm) and on the medial side of her right wrist (0.5 haematological, neoplastic) causes of ulcers in tropical countries. In areas endemic for BU, the accuracy of clinical diag 1 cm). The larger ulcer is filled with necrotic tissue nosis in experienced hands is remarkably high. ( tion, lichenification and desquamation. An ill-defined induration surrounds the ulcers (12 8 cm) with oedema extending from the lower arm to the fingers. A 0.5 0.5 cm nodule is noticed above the medial right elbow. Questions 1. What is the most likely diagnosis and what is the differential diagnosis? 2. What is the appropriate clinical approach in the given context? necrotic tissue; second smaller ulcer on the medial side of the wrist. 113 --- PAGE BREAK -- 114 ever, the second, smaller ulcer had increased in size. Answer to Question 2 bodies such as rivers and lakes. However, the exact mode of What is the Appropriate Clinical Approach in the transmission remains poorly understood. Given Context? M. ulcerans is characterized by its particular sensitivity to heat, its propensity to develop local and distant satellite lesions and its Adequate wound care, including pain relief, according to production of a necrotizing, locally immunosuppressive and WHO guidelines should be instituted immediately. The analgesic macrolide exotoxin called mycolactone. desired sterile, moist atmosphere of the wound can be Clinically, M. ulcerans disease presents with skin lesions achieved with saline-soaked gauze changed daily. Coloniza- ranging from papules, nodules and plaques to the eponymous ulcers. The latter may involve most of a limb surface or trunk and tion with other bacteria may be controlled by povidonecan simultaneously occur at different body sites. All lesions share iodine. Antitetanus coverage must be secured. Written docskin alterations including induration, hypo- and hyperpigmentaumentation of pain control and picture documentation of tion, lichenification, desquamation and possibly local oedema. wound progress is helpful in achieving or maintaining a Ulcers are characterized by undermined edges surrounding a high-quality wound management standard. ‘cotton wool’ like necrosis. Lesions are classically described as Laboratory confirmation of BU by M. ulcerans using PCR painless, but evidence has emerged questioning this doctrine. The diagnosis can be confirmed most reliably by PCR from a is desirable but limited by the availability of reliable laborawound swab; however, a test for the presence of mycolactone tory capacity and by its cost, which must be balanced with suitable for district-level laboratories is under investigation. important supportive measures, such as improved nutrition. Culture is difficult because of the slow growth rate of the The indication for surgical debridement depends on the mycobacteria. The WHO recommends combination therapy with rifampicin clinical picture, but also on the availability of adequate anaes (10 mg/kg per day PO) plus either streptomycin (15 mg/kg per day thetic and surgical care. IM) or clarithromycin (7.5 mg/kg twice daily PO) for 8 weeks, BU-specific antimycobacterial therapy should be com- which achieve high specific cure rates. Local heat application at menced as soon as possible. In the absence of systemic symp- temperatures >40°C for several weeks has also been shown to toms, the toxicity of the recommended antibiotic treatment be curative. Special attention must be paid to patients co-infected with HIV, who are at increased risk for complications. may justify a few days of delay until diagnostic results have Careful wound management, pain relief, surgical excision and been obtained. skin grafting as well as physiotherapy for restricted movements remain indispensable cornerstones of BU treatment. Extensive The Case Continued… necrosis of subcutaneous tissue at diagnosis may cause a significant increase in ulcer size under treatment. Once secondary PCR from a wound swab confirmed the presence of M. ulcer- bacterial infection has been ruled out, this must not be mistaken ans. During the 8 weeks of specific treatment and wound for treatment failure. Local or distant new lesions may become evident during or after treatment. This so called ‘paradoxical care the ulcer on the back of the hand healed almost completely, but the second smaller ulcer increased to 8 reaction’ is thought to be caused by a local host immune reconstitution syndrome because of a fall in mycolactone levels. 10 cm in size ( Debridement and skin grafting were performed, and the and paradoxical reactions remains challenging and should involve patient made an uneventful recovery. The restriction of expert advice. movement was corrected by physiotherapy. Further Reading SUMMARY BOX 1. Junghanss T, Johnson C, Pluschke G. Mycobacterium ulcerans disease. In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. Mycobacterium ulcerans Disease (Buruli Ulcer) London: Elsevier; 2013 [ M. ulcerans disease is a necrotizing infection mainly of the sub- 2. Laboratory diagnosis of buruli ulcer. A manual for health care procutaneous tissue. It is most prevalent among children and ado- viders. World Health Organization; 2014; WHO/HTM/NTD/ lescents living in rural communities of West Africa; but other IDM/2014.1, Available from: https://apps. who. int/iris/bitstream/ continents and temperate regions of Australia, China and Japan handle/10665 /111738 /9789241505703_eng. pdf?sequence¼1 are also affected. Endemic areas are associated with water (accessed 01.05.19). --- PAGE BREAK -- 3. Treatment of Mycobaterium ulcerans disease (Buruli ulcer): guid- Organization; 2010. http://whqlibdoc. who. int/publications/2010 / ance for health workers. World Health Organization; 2012; 9789241599139_eng. pdf (accessed 01.05.19). WHO/HTM/NTD/IDM/2012.1, Available from: https://apps. 5. Yotsu RR, Suzuki K, Simmonds RE, et al. Buruli ulcer: a review who. int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665 /77771 /9789241503402_ of the current knowledge. Curr Trop Med Rep 2018;5(4): eng. pdf?sequence¼1 (accessed 01.05.19). 247–56. 4. Macdonald JM, Geyer MJ, editors. Wound and Lymphoedema Management. WHO/HTM/NTD/GBUI/2010.1. World Health