52 A 56-Year-Old Man from Peru With Prolonged Fever and Severe Anaemia CIRO MAGUIÑA, CARLOS SEAS AND FREDERIQUE JACQUERIOZ Clinical Presentation Questions History 1. What are your differential diagnoses? 2. How would you approach this patient? A 56-year-old male Peruvian is admitted to a hospital in the capital, Lima, with a 2-week history of fever, jaundice and Discussion confusion. Daily fever started 3 months after leaving a rural area in A Peruvian man presents with a history of prolonged fever, the highlands of northern Peru (altitude of 2400 m), where altered neurological status and evidence of haemolysis after a the patient spent 3 weeks on vacation. In the second week of stay in a rural area in the highlands of Peru. illness the patient noticed dark urine and jaundice, and few days before admission his wife noticed confusion and som Answer to Question 1 nolence. While in the rural area, the patient and his wife were bitten at night by tiny mosquitoes; no personal protection What Are Your Differential Diagnoses? was used. Otherwise there has been no animal contact. The most important differential diagnoses in this patient are The past medical history is unremarkable. malaria and bartonellosis. Plasmodium vivax is the only species of Plasmodium prevalent in the highland regions of Peru. Interestingly, the Clinical Findings patient presents with several features of severe and complicated malaria, including severe anaemia, jaundice and His blood pressure is 90 /60 mm Hg, pulse 110 bpm and regular, temperature 39.2°C (102.6°F), respiratory rate 22 impaired consciousness. However, P. vivax is not breaths per minute. The patient appears confused and disorientated without any focal neurological findings or menin TABLE geal signs (GCS 14 /15). Skin and conjunctivae are Blood Results on Admission 52.1 markedly pale and there is scleral jaundice. Cardiovascular and pulmonary examination are normal. The liver is slightly Parameter Patient Reference Range enlarged but there is no splenomegaly. WBC ( 109 /L) 14.9 4–10 Neutrophils ( 109 /L) 13.1 1.8–7.2 Laboratory Results Lymphocytes ( 109 /L) 0.9 1.5–4 Creatinine, electrolytes and alkaline phosphatase are normal. Band forms (%) 4 0–5 His additional routine laboratory results are shown in Haemoglobin (g/d L) 6 13–15 normal. Platelets ( 109 /L) 454 150–350 LDH (U/L) 1500 <250 Further Investigations Total bilirubin (μmol/L) 239 <19 A CT scan of the brain is normal. Abdominal ultrasound Direct bilirubin (μmol/L) 103 <5 reveals hepatomegaly, but no focal lesions. 144 --- PAGE BREAK -- commonly associated with severe malaria. Bartonellosis is another important diagnosis to consider given the recent travel history in the highlands of Peru, where sandflies, the vectors of bartonellosis, are present. The patient also reported being bitten by tiny mosquitoes. Less common infections to include in the differential diagnosis are rickettsial diseases (both endemic and epidemic typhus are present in Peru), leptospirosis, typhoid fever, brucellosis and several viral diseases, including viral hepatitis and yellow fever. However, none of them produces significant haemolysis and some are not endemic in the highlands (yellow fever for instance). Non-infectious causes of haemolysis should also be considered. Answer to Question 2 sizes characteristic of the chronic phase (verruga peruana). How Would You Approach This Patient? The first step is to rule out malaria by performing a thick and thin smear or by using rapid diagnostic tests. Based on the SUMMARY BOX exposure history and the high suspicion of bartonellosis, a thin film should be performed to calculate the differential leukocyte count and to look for the presence of Bartonella Bartonellosis – Oroya Fever and Verruga Peruana bacilliformis in red blood cells. Bartonellosis, caused by B. bacilliformis, is a vector-borne disease mainly found in the Andean valleys of Peru at an altitude between 500 and 3200 metres, although transmission may occur at higher altitudes and in jungle areas as well. Colombia and The Case Continued… Ecuador have also reported sporadic cases. The disease is transmitted by female sandflies, mostly Lutzomyia verrucarum or The patient progressed to shock. He was transferred to the L. peruensis, which characteristically bite indoors at nighttime. Human beings are the only known reservoir. Non-vectorial B. intensive care unit (ICU) and required treatment with vasobacilliformis transmission from mother to child or through blood pressors. Blood films were negative for malaria. However, the transfusions has been described but remains scarce. Most thin film revealed massive red blood cell infestation by pleo- infections are asymptomatic or oligosymptomatic. However, a morphic cocco-bacillary structures compatible with B. bacil- minority of patients progress to severe disease (‘Oroya fever’) liformis ( cultures in special media for Bartonella. The patient was periods up to 9 months have been observed). Oroya fever is characterized by high fever, malaise, myalgias and severe started on a combination of intravenous ciprofloxacin and haemolytic anaemia with jaundice. Complications during this ceftriaxone for 10 days. Altered mental status resolved after acute phase include heart failure, as well as pericardial and pleural 3 days of antimicrobial treatment and fever subsided after effusions. CNS involvement, characterized by impaired 5 days. By day 4 the bacteria had disappeared from the blood consciousness, agitation and coma, occurs in approximately 20 % of patients and is associated with higher case fatality rates. smears. No further complications were observed during a Secondary immunosuppression may occur during this phase and 3-month follow-up period. patients may present with opportunistic infections similar to those seen in advanced HIV-infection, e. g. salmonellosis, toxoplasmosis or Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia. After acute Oroya fever, within 1 to 2 months a chronic angioproliferative cutaneous stage (‘verruga peruana’) may occur in approximately 5 % of treated patients and in an unknown percentage of untreated individuals. Occasionally, verruga peruana is seen without noticeable acute-phase manifestations. It is mostly seen in children in endemic areas. Skin lesions are usually small (1–4 mm), red-violaceous, painless papules located on the face or the extremities, and can be single or multiple ( Nodular lesions can also be observed. The lesions resemble bacillary angiomatosis caused by B. quintana and B. henselae. In the acute phase, diagnosis is made by proof of cocco-bacilli inside red blood cells. B. bacilliformis is a fastidious bacterium, and culture requires a specific medium incubated at 25 to 28°C for up to 2 weeks. Recommended treatment of the acute phase includes ciprofloxacin alone or combined with ceftriaxone in severe cases. These antimicrobials also cover for Salmonella species, the with cocco-bacillary structures (Wright stain). Increased antibiotic resistance of both B. bacilliformis and --- PAGE BREAK -- 146 Further Reading concomitant opportunistic pathogens has been observed and should be sought in the absence of a clinical response. Oral azithromycin is the drug of choice for verruga peruana. Alterna- 1. Angelakis E, Raoult D. Bartonellosis, cat-scratch disease, trench tively, ciprofloxacin can be used. fever, human Ehrlichiosis. In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical Note: Oroya fever is also named Carrion’s disease after a Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 [ famous Peruvian medical student, Daniel Carrion, who in 1885 2. Gomes C, Ruiz J. Carrion’s disease: the sound of silence. Clin inoculated himself with fluid obtained of a wart from a patient with Microbiol Rev 2017;31(1). e 00056-17. verruga peruana and developed acute bartonellosis (Oroya fever). 3. Maguina C, Garcia PJ, Gotuzzo E, et al. Bartonellosis (Carrion’s He unfortunately died from the disease. However, his experiment disease) in the modern era. Clin Infect Dis 2001;33(6):772–9. demonstrated clearly that verruga peruana and Oroya fever were different clinical forms of the same infection.