54 A 52-Year-Old Male Safari Tourist Returning from South Africa With Fever and a Skin Lesion CAMILLA ROTHE Answer to Question 1 Clinical Presentation What is the Diagnosis? History The skin lesion is a typical eschar. Given the travel history, A 52-year-old man presents to a tropical medicine clinic in the clinical diagnosis is most likely African tick-bite fever. Germany with a fever for the past 2 days. He is also com- This rickettsial disease is a common cause of fever in safari plaining of night sweats and a frontal headache. There are tourists returning from Southern Africa. no joint pains and he has not noticed a rash. Ten days ago, he returned from a 2-week holiday trip to Answer to Question 2 South Africa. He visited Cape Town and travelled the Garden Route and through Kwa Zulu–Natal. He went on safari How Would You Manage This Patient? in Kruger Park and several other game reserves. He did not The patient has travelled to Kwa Zulu–Natal, which is a take any antimalarial chemoprophylaxis. His past medical malaria-endemic region, and he has not taken any antimalarhistory is unremarkable. ial chemoprophylaxis. In any febrile traveller returning from a malaria-endemic region, malaria has to be ruled out, even if other diagnoses seem obvious. Clinical Findings The diagnosis of African tick-bite fever is primarily clinical. Fair general condition. Tympanic temperature 37.5°C (99.5°F) (after taking 1 g of paracetamol), pulse 80 bpm, blood pressure 130 /70 mm Hg. No jaundice; neck supple. Enlarged lymph nodes in the left groin. You notice a small sticking plaster on the left upper thigh of the patient. He tells you that he has noted a skin lesion that he meant to show to a friend, who happens to be a surgeon, for advice. You ask the patient to take off the plaster (see Questions 1. What is the diagnosis? 2. How would you manage this patient? Discussion A 52-year-old German man presents with a short history of fever after a trip to South Africa. On examination there is a small necrotic skin lesion on his upper thigh with adjoining surrounding inflammation and lymphangiitis on the left upper thigh of lymphangiitis and lymphadenitis. the patient. 149 --- PAGE BREAK -- 150 TABLE Overview of Rickettsial Infections and their Vectors 54.1 Tick-borne Mite-borne Louse-borne Flea-borne Synonyms Spotted fevers Scrub typhus, Epidemic typhus Murine typhus, Tsutsugamushi fever, Endemic typhus, Shop Japanese river fever typhus Classification Spotted Fever (SF) Group Scrub typhus Group Typhus Group Typhus Group Pathogens Many, e. g. Orientia tsutsugamushi R. prowazekii R. typhi R. africae (African tick bite fever) O. sp. nov. chuto (UAE) R. conorii (Mediterranean SF) R. rickettsii (Rocky mountain SF) R. australis (Queensland tick typhus) Vector Ticks Trombiculid mites Pediculus humanus Xenopsylla cheopis (chigger mites, jungle corporis (rat flea) mites) (human body lice) Reservoir Mammals Mites (transovarian) Humans Rodents Rodents Rodents Marsupials.... A PCR from the eschar scab may confirm the diagnosis. The incubation period following the bite of an infected tick is For confirmative serology, paired samples would have to be about 6 to 10 days. Patients develop fever and flu-like symptoms taken and may be more of academic value in this case. Afri- such as myalgias and headache. There may be a characteristic can tick-bite fever is usually a mild, self-limiting disease. inoculation eschar at the site of the bite with local lymphadenopathy. It may however take some time for the pathognomonic Doxycycline can be given to speed up recovery. eschar to demarcate and early lesions may be non-specific erythematous papules, resembling mosquito bites. Multiple The Case Continued… inoculation eschars are not uncommon, because Amblyomma ticks are known to aggressively attack their hosts. The malaria rapid diagnostic test, as well as thick and thin Despite the fact that African tick-bite fever belongs to the group of ‘spotted fevers’, a rash is seen in less than half of cases. film for malaria, came back negative. The patient was pre ATBF is usually a mild illness and no deaths have been reported scribed doxycycline at 100 mg bid PO for 1 week. The fever so far. settled within the next few days and the lymphadenopathy However, neurological involvement has been described in subsided. The eschar eventually healed after about 2 weeks. ATBF, including encephalopathy and peripheral neuropathy. Also, retinitis and panuveitis have been described. SUMMARY BOX Diagnosis of ATBF is usually made clinically, but in febrile individuals living in or returning from tropical areas malaria should still be ruled out. African Tick-Bite Fever PCR from the eschar scab or even a skin swab is a non African tick-bite fever (ATBF) is the second most common specific invasive and sensitive way to confirm the diagnosis of acute cause of fever after malaria in travellers returning from sub- infection. Serodiagnosis remains the gold standard for spotted Saharan Africa. fever group rickettsial infections using seroconversion and It belongs to the spotted fever group of rickettsioses, a large fourfold antibody titre increases. Its use in clinical decisiongroup of infections, which are mainly transmitted by ticks. An making is however limited because of poor sensitivity during overview of rickettsial infections and their vectors is given in acute infection (antibodies are often not detectable within the ATBF is caused by Rickettsia africae and transmitted by cattle cross-reaction with other Rickettsiae. The immunofluorescence ticks of the genus Amblyomma, which act both as reservoir and assay (IFA) is currently considered the gold standard as vector. serological test. Other reservoir hosts are wild and domestic animals, such as Treatment may not be necessary in mild cases. Doxycycline cattle, buffalos, rhinos, and hippos. ATBF is endemic in most of 100 mg bid PO may be given for 3 to 7 days. In pregnant women rural sub-Saharan Africa and in the West Indies. and in children younger than 8 years of age, macrolides are an ATBF commonly occurs in game hunters, safari tourists, alternative. cross-country runners and campers in veld areas or grasslands. Preventive measures include appropriate clothing, which ATBF is one of the most common causes of febrile presentations should be impregnated with pyrethroids, and topical insect in international travellers to sub-Saharan Africa, and it is the most repellents applied to the skin. Whether tetracyclines can be used common rickettsial infection encountered in travel medicine. In as chemoprophylaxis against ATBF is still a matter of dispute. contrast, fairly little is known about incidence and risk factors of ATBF in local indigenous populations. --- PAGE BREAK -- Further Reading 3. Jensenii M, Fournier PE, Raoult D. Rickettsioses and the international traveler. Clin Infect Dis 2004;39(10):1493–9. 1. Paris DH, Day NPJ. Tropical rickettsial infections. In: Farrar J, 4. Parole P, Paddock CD, Sokolowski C, et al. Update on tick-borne editor. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; Rickettsioses around the world: a geographic approach. Clin Micro 2013 [ 2. Elden C, Parole P. Update on tick-borne bacterial diseases in trav- 5. Paris DH, Dumper JD. State of the art of diagnosis of rickettsial elers. Curr Inf Dis Rep 2018;20(17):1–9. diseases. Curr Opin Infect Dis 2016;29:433–9.