56 A 21-Year-Old Pregnant Woman from The Gambia With a Rash DAVID C. W. MABEY Clinical Presentation case fatality rate even with treatment. Alternatively, the baby may appear normal at birth, and present at the age History of 3 to 4 months with failure to thrive and signs of congenital syphilis, usually including a generalized rash which A 21-year-old woman comes to your clinic in The Gambia affects the palms of the hands and soles of the feet complaining of a generalized, non-itchy rash that she has had ( for 5 days. She is otherwise well and has no significant past galy, painful periostitis involving the long bones, and a permedical history. She is 32 weeks pregnant. This is her first sistent nasal discharge, which may be bloodstained (the pregnancy. ‘syphilitic snuffles’). Clinical Findings Answer to Question 2 How Would You Manage the Patient? She has a generalized rash ( and there is no lymphadenopathy. She is not anaemic or Intramuscular benzathine penicillin is the treatment of jaundiced, and general examination is unremarkable. choice for syphilis. A single dose of 2.4 million units i. m. is recommended for primary, secondary and early latent Questions syphilis (of less than two years’ duration). A single dose, given before 28 weeks’ gestation, has been shown to prevent 1. What is the most likely diagnosis, and how might this adverse outcomes resulting from syphilis. Because this affect the outcome of her pregnancy? patient has not been treated before 28 weeks, her infant 2. How would you manage the patient? should receive a course of treatment for congenital syphilis (IM procaine penicillin 50 000 units/kg daily for Discussion 10–14 days) A 21-year-old pregnant Gambian woman presents because of a generalized macular rash involving the palms of both hands. The rash is non-itchy and she is otherwise fine. Answer to Question 1 What is the Most Likely Diagnosis, and How Might This Affect the Outcome of Her Pregnancy? A generalized, non-itchy rash affecting the palms of the hands is syphilis until proven otherwise. Syphilis in pregnancy has a serious influence on pregnancy outcome. A study in Tanzania showed that, among women with latent syphilis and a rapid plasma reagin (RPR) titre of 1:8, 25 % delivered a stillborn baby, and 33 % a low-birth-weight baby. The baby may be born with signs of congenital syphilis, including a generalized bullous rash, jaundice and hepatos- plenomegaly. In this case the prognosis is bad, with a 50 % Gambian woman. 155 --- PAGE BREAK -- 156 disseminated infection, are most likely to infect their foetus, but the infection can cross the placenta in pregnant women with latent syphilis. According to current WHO estimates, syphilis in pregnancy causes 355,000 adverse pregnancy outcomes per year, including 143,000 early foetal deaths and stillbirths and 61,000 neonatal deaths. These could be prevented if all pregnant women were screened for syphilis, and treated with a single dose of penicillin if they test positive, before 28 weeks’ gestation. Serological tests for syphilis are either treponemal (e. g. TPHA, TPPA), or non-treponemal (e. g. RPR or VDRL). Treponemal tests remain positive for life, whereas non-treponemal tests usually revert to negative after successful treatment, and can therefore be used as a test of cure. They may give false-positive results because of other infections (e. g. malaria), or autoimmune dis lesion of the palms. attending antenatal clinics that do not have access to a laboratory. However, sensitive and specific treponemal point-of-care tests are now available at an affordable price (<$1) which can give The Case Continued… a result in 15 minutes and require neither electricity nor laboratory equipment. The patient was treated with a single IM dose of benzathine penicillin and she made an uneventful recovery. She deliv Further Reading ered a normal infant at term. 1. Richens J, Mayaud P, Mabey DCW. Sexually transmitted infec SUMMARY BOX tions (excluding HIV). In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 [ Syphilis in Pregnancy 2. Korenromp EL, Rowley J, Alonso M, et al. Global burden of mater Primary syphilis causes an ulcer or chancre, at the site of inoc- nal and congenital syphilis and associated adverse birth outcomesulation, which is usually painless. Women are often unaware of the Estimates for 2016 and progress since 2012. PLo S One 2019;14: lesion, because it may be on the cervix or vaginal wall. The sec- e 0211720. https://doi. org/10.1371 /journal. pone.0211720. ondary stage usually occurs 6 to 8 weeks later, causing a gen 3. Watson-Jones D, Changalucha J, Gumodoka B, et al. Syphilis in eralized rash that often affects the palms of the hands, and usually pregnancy in Tanzania. I. Impact of maternal syphilis on outcome does not itch. There may be other manifestations, including of pregnancy. J Infect Dis 2002;186(7):940–7. jaundice or ocular involvement (uveitis). The clinical signs resolve 4. Watson-Jones D, Gumodoka B, Weiss H, et al. Syphilis in pregover a few weeks in the absence of treatment, after which the patient enters the latent stage. A small minority develop tertiary nancy in Tanzania. II. The effectiveness of antenatal syphilis lesions involving the cardiovascular or nervous system many screening and single-dose benzathine penicillin treatment for the years later. Progression may be more rapid in HIV-positive prevention of adverse pregnancy outcomes. J Infect Dis 2002; patients. Women with secondary syphilis, who have a 186(7): 948–57.