62 A 28-Year-Old Man from Ghana With a Chronic Ulcer on His Ankle FREDERICKA SEY AND IVY EKEM Clinical Presentation Discussion History A 28-year-old West African man presents with a chronic, painful ankle ulcer. He had a similar ulcer on the other foot A 28-year-old West African man presents to a clinic in a few years prior. He also complains of bone pains. He is Ghana complaining of a painful ulcer on his left ankle. short for an adult, pale and mildly jaundiced. The ulcer has been present for the past 4 months and is not healing ( however, he had a previous ulcer on his right ankle some Answer to Question 1 years ago which took about a year to heal. He also complains What is Your Differential Diagnosis? of pain in his right thigh and in both knees. The chronic nature of the ulcer, its site and the surrounding hyperpigmentation make a venous ulcer likely. The patient’s Clinical Findings bone pain, jaundice and pallor could point to a haemolytic anaemia. Various hereditary haemolytic anaemias may be The patient is short for an adult; he is pale and has a tinge of complicated by chronic leg ulceration, e. g. haemoglobinopajaundice. The ulcer is on his left ankle, next to the medial thies (thalassaemia and sickle cell disease), spherocytosis and malleolus; the skin surrounding it is hyperpigmented. There pyruvate kinase deficiency. In the West African context, is tenderness in both knee joints and in his right thigh. The sickle cell disease is the most likely diagnosis. rest of the physical examination is normal. Vital signs: Tem Further differentials would be tropical ulcer, diabetic perature 36.6°C, pulse 88 bpm, blood pressure 110 / ulcer or chronic osteomyelitis with a discharging sinus. Bur 70 mm Hg. uli ulcer, caused by Mycobacterium ulcerans, is usually painless. Other mycobacterial infections can also present with Questions chronic skin ulcers. Pyoderma gangrenosum and malignant diseases also need to be considered. 1. What is your differential diagnosis? 2. How would you confirm the diagnosis? Answer to Question 2 How Would You Confirm the Diagnosis? A full blood count and a peripheral blood film should be done. In sickle cell disease, during an acute crisis, abundant sickled red cells can be seen on a blood film. Other characteristic but non-specific features include target cells, Howell– Jolly bodies, polychromasia and nucleated red cells. The presence of Hb S can be demonstrated by using a simple sickle slide or solubility test. Blood is mixed with sodium metabisulphite, which will provoke sickling of cells containing Hb S; this can be demonstrated on a slide. If resources pigmented skin on the medial malleolus. liquid chromatography or isoelectric focusing. 170 --- PAGE BREAK -- Fasting blood sugar and wound swab for culture and sen- wound dressing using normal saline irrigation and povisitivity as well as a radiograph of the left leg should be done done-iodine. High white cell counts are commonly seen in to rule out other differential diagnoses and osteomyelitis. sickle cell disease. They may be the result of bone marrow stimulation and do not necessarily indicate systemic infection. However, in view of the patient’s generally poor condi The Case Continued… tion and the Pseudomonas grown from his wound swab, it was decided to give him systemic antibiotic treatment. Blood was taken and the available results are shown in man was self-employed and could not afford to take the The sickling test was positive and haemoglobin electrophoresis showed a homozygous Hb SS-type. The wound swab grew Pseu- required time off work. His recurrent bone pain was mandomonas species sensitive to levofloxacin. Radiography showed a aged conservatively with good hydration, prompt treatment of infections and relief of other identifiable precipitants of periosteal reaction with slightly sclerotic bones. crises. He received daily folic acid supplementation. Pain relief was achieved with paracetamol and tramadol. However, on follow-up 3 years later, the ulcer was still not TABLE Laboratory Results healed. Grafting was under consideration, when healthy 62.1 granulation tissue would be achieved. Patient Patient Six years later, the wound had still not healed and the initial 6 years Reference patient could not afford a skin graft. He had 3 times weekly Parameter visit later Range dressing and felt well in himself. His WBC was normal and WBC ( 109 /L) 17.6 9.2 4–10 his Hb had slightly increased (see Table 62.1). Haemoglobin 6.9 8.3 13–15 SUMMARY BOX (g/d L) Platelet ( 109 /L) Adequate 364 150–400 Leg Ulcers in Sickle Cell Disease Fasting blood 4.8 Not 4.4–6.1 Sickle cell disease (SCD) is a collection of autosomalglucose (mmol/L) done codominant genetic disorders characterized by the production of abnormal sickle haemoglobin S (Hb S). Homozygous Hb SS leads to sickle cell anaemia, the most severe form of SCD. Sickle cell disease is the commonest hereditary haematological disorder. Hb S has the tendency to polymerize during hypoxia. This leads to a reduction of the flexibility of the erythrocyte and to the typical sickle shape of the affected cell. Sickled red blood cells lead to haemolysis and vaso-occlusion. The disease is characterized by episodes of acute illness against a background of progressive organ damage. Any organ can be affected by SCD at any age; however, certain features tend to predominate in certain age-groups. Leg ulcers tend to manifest in adulthood. Pathophysiology is complex and remains incompletely understood. Ulcers in SCD occur in areas with thin skin and little subcutaneous fat, most commonly on the ankles. They are notoriously difficult to treat. The ulcers are slow to heal and are characterized by unexplained relapses. They are commonly very painful and patients may occasionally require opioids for pain control. Colonization with pathogenic bacteria is common. Periosteal reaction is usually seen in the underlying bones but osteomyelitis is uncommon. Of the many treatments, the most certain to aid healing is complete bed rest with leg elevation. Oral zinc sulphate tablets (200 mg tid) have been shown to be helpful. Systemic antibiotic therapy is given in acute sepsis. The use of hydroxyurea in leg ulcers is controversial. Chronic transfusion regimens to maintain sia (P), target cells (TC), nucleated red cells (NRC) – note similarity with vative therapy fails. Skin grafting for clean wounds is recommended, especially when the defect is large. The relapse rate is lymphocyte (L). Adequate platelets. high, however. Poor nutrition which has not been given much attention may be a crucial factor and needs to be investigated on The diagnosis made was sickle cell disease with a chronic a wide scale in sickle cell disease. ankle ulcer. The patient was managed with alternate daily --- PAGE BREAK -- 172 Further Reading 4. Halabi-Tawil M, Lionnet F, Girot R, et al. Sickle cell leg ulcers: a frequently disabling complication and a marker of severity. Br 1. Thachil J, Owusu-Ofori S, Bates I. Haematological diseases in the J Dermatol 2008;158(2):339–44. tropics. In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. 5. Serena TE, Yaakov RA, De Legge M, Mayhugh TA, Moore S. Nutri London: Elsevier; 2013 [ 2. Ware RE, de Montalembert M, Tshilolo L, Abboud MR. Sickle cell wound care. Chronic Wound Care Manage Res 2018;5:5–9. Availdisease. Lancet 2017;390:311–23. able from: https://doi. org/10.2147 /CWCMR. S 155114. Accessed 3. Delaney KM, Axelrod KC, Buscetta A, et al. Leg ulcers in sickle cell 11 April 2019. disease: current patterns and practices. Hemoglobin 2013;37(4): 325–32.