64 A 40-Year-Old Woman from Thailand and Her Brother-in-Law With Severe Headache CAMILLA ROTHE AND JURI KATCHANOV Laboratory Results Clinical Presentation Her laboratory results at presentation in the clinic are shown History in Table 64.1. A 40-year-old Thai woman presents to an outpatient clinic in Germany with a history of severe headache for the past 8 days. Questions The headache was of gradual onset and did not respond to any painkillers. There is no fever and no chills. She denies 1. What is your presumptive diagnosis? any visual problems, any weakness of her limbs or memory 2. Which investigation would you perform to substantiate problems. your diagnosis? Ten days earlier she had returned from a 4-week journey to north-east Thailand, where she visited friends Discussion and relatives. During her visit she ate traditional regional dishes, including freshwater fish, seafood, snails and frogs. A 40-year-old Thai woman presents with a history of severe She reports that her brother-in-law, with whom she had intractable headache after a stay in north-east Thailand where shared several traditional meals, has also fallen ill with a she enjoyed traditional regional dishes. Her brother-in-law severe headache. in Thailand is suffering from the same severe headache. She presented to a municipal hospital 3 days earlier. A CT scan of her brain was performed and reported to be normal. TABLE Laboratory Results at Presentation in the Her blood count was also normal. A differential white cell 64.1 Clinic count has not been done. Her past medical history is unremarkable. The patient is Parameter (units) Patient Reference married, she is a housewife and has lived in Germany for the WBC ( 109 /L) 12.3 4–10 past 13 years. Eosinophils ( 109 /L) 2.34 <0.5 Haemoglobin (mg/d L) 11.7 12–14 Clinical Findings MCV (f L) 70 83–103 On examination, she is afebrile, her neck is supple and Lasè- Platelets ( 109 /L) 330 150–350 gue’s sign (straight leg raise) is negative. Pupils are equal, ESR (mm/h) 20 10 round and react to light and accommodation, and there are no cranial nerve palsies. The remainder of the neuro- Ig E (U/m L) 944 <100 logical examination, including the assessment of higher Creatinine (μmol/L) 62 <80 cortical functions such as language, memory and praxia, is ALT (U/L) 28 <30 unremarkable. There is no rash, no oral thrush and there are no subcutaneous swellings. Cardiopulmonary examina- GGT (U/L) 35 <40 tion is normal. Liver and spleen are not enlarged, and there C-reactive protein (mg/L) <5 <5 is no lymphadenopathy. 176 --- PAGE BREAK -- On examination, she is afebrile with no meningism and no focal neurological deficits. Her blood results reveal peripheral eosinophilia and elevated Ig E levels. A CT scan of her brain done elsewhere showed no abnormalities. Answer to Question 1 What is Your Presumptive Diagnosis? The most likely diagnosis is a food-borne parasitic infection of the meninges. The key points from the history which support a food-borne infection are: (1) temporal relationship with travelling to north-east Thailand, where food-borne nematodes are prevalent; (2) consumption of traditional Thai food, including raw or undercooked freshwater fish, seafood, snails and frogs; and (3) the occurrence of similar symptoms in a relative who participated in the same meals large numbers of eosinophils with red (eosinophilic) cytoplasm. (Cour (cluster). tesy Prof. Thomas Schneider) Headache is a typical symptom of meningitis, therefore infestation of the meninges is very likely. The diagnosis of a parasitosis is strongly supported by the presence of consid- The Case Continued… erable blood eosinophilia and elevated Ig E levels in serum. A lumbar puncture was performed. The cerebrospinal fluid Answer to Question 2 showed 1877 leukocytes/μL (reference value <5), with 42 % eosinophils, 39 % lymphocytes, 18 % monocytes and Which Investigation Would You Perform to 1 % neutrophils ( Substantiate Your Diagnosis? at 1.59 g/L (reference value <0.45), glucose was 1.85 mmol/L Parasitic infection of the meninges typically results in eosin- (reference range: 2.2–3.9). ophilic meningitis. The next investigation to perform is a On microscopic examination of the CSF, no larvae could lumbar puncture to confirm meningitis and to look for a pos- be detected. Ziehl–Neelsen stain as well as cryptococcal sibly eosinophilic profile of inflammation. Eosinophilic antigen were negative. There were no suspected malignant meningitis in an otherwise healthy person with positive his- cells. CSF culture did not yield any bacterial or fungal tory of exposure to helminths and features of an outbreak is growth. Urine and stool microscopy did not show any ova almost always attributable to a parasitic infestation. of Schistosoma species. Taenia solium serology was negative, The main differential diagnoses are fungal meningitis as were Fasciola hepatica and Paragonimus serologies. Toxowith Coccidioides immitis (in North and Central America), cara canis serology was weakly positive but did not show lymphoma, eosinophilic leukaemia, sarcoid and idiopathic any change of titre on follow-up. HIV serology was negative. hypereosinophilic syndrome. The initial CSF opening pressure was elevated, at It is important to measure the CSF opening pressure. If it 34 cm H O (reference range 12–20). Lumbar puncture 2 is elevated, serial spinal taps might relieve the symptoms. relieved the patient’s headache and was therefore repeated TABLE Main Causes and Characteristics of Parasitic Eosinophilic Meningitis 64.2 Incubation Pathogen Period Source of Infection Geography Clinical Features Serology Angiostrongylus 2–35 days Consumption of infected South-east Asia, Paraesthesia of trunk, Western blot of cantonensis crustaceans, snails, prawns, Pacific basin, limbs, or face antibodies crabs, frogs, and/or Australia, against 31 k D contaminated vegetables Caribbean antigen∗ Gnathostoma Days to Consumption of infected South-east Asia Migrating Western blot of spinigerum months poultry or fish, snakes, (mainly Thailand), subcutaneous antibodies frogs emerging in sub- swellings, creeping against 24 k D Saharan Africa eruption, sharp antigen∗ radicular pain at onset ∗Serology can be negative in acute state and a paired convalescence sample should be taken after 4 weeks. --- PAGE BREAK -- 178 twice, whereupon the patient felt markedly better. No further systemic circulation. A. cantonensis is a truly neurotropic helspecific treatment was prescribed. She received iron tablets minth. Humans are dead-end hosts, the larvae die in the human for a mild microcytic anaemia. The patient was discharged subarachnoid space, causing an eosinophilic inflammatory significantly improved after a 1-week hospital stay. After response. To date, no standard of care treatment regimen for CNS her discharge, serology results came back and Western Blot angiostrongyliasis exists. Mild cases may be managed sympshowed specific antibodies against 31 k D Angiostrongylus tomatically with serial lumbar punctures and analgesics. More cantonensis antigen. Since the patient hat no symptoms any severe cases may be treated with corticosteroids alone or in more no further treatment was prescribed. At 4-week combination with anthelmintic drugs. Corticosteroids follow-up she had fully recovered and her peripheral eosino- (eg prednisolone 1 mg/kg/day) reduce the duration and intensity of headache. The use of antiparasitic drugs (eg phil count had returned to normal. albendazole) is controversial and the benefit of antipararasitic treatment compared to steroid use alone is marginal. If antiparasitic drugs are administered, they should be given with SUMMARY BOX steroid cover. Eosinophilic Meningitis Eosinophilic meningitis is defined as the presence of ten or more eosinophils per microlitre of CSF, or eosinophilia of at Further Reading least 10 % of the total CSF leukocyte count. Invasion of the central nervous system by the food-borne nematodes 1. Heckmann JE, Bhigjee AI. Tropical neurology. In: Farrar J, editor. Angiostrongylus cantonensis, and less frequently, Gnathos- Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 toma spinigerum, are the most common causes (Table 64.2). [ Rarely, neurocysticercosis, neuroschistosomiasis, paragoni 2. Graeff-Teixeira C, da Silva AC, Yoshimura K. Update on eosinomiasis, fascioliasis, toxocariasis, baylisascariasis and trichinelphilic meningoencephalitis and its clinical relevance. Clin Microlosis can be associated with eosinophilic meningitis; however, the meningeal involvement is usually not prominent. biol Rev 2009;22(2):322–48. Angiostrongylus cantonensis, the rat lungworm, is the most 3. Wang QP, Lai DH, Zhu XQ, et al. Human angiostrongyliasis. common infectious cause of eosinophilic meningitis. Humans Lancet Infect Dis 2008;8(10):621–30. are infected by ingestion of Angiostrongylus larvae in interme- 4. Martins YC, Tanowitz HB, Kazacos KR. Central nervous system diate hosts such as fresh water snails and slugs; or transport manifestations of Angiostrongylus cantonensis infection. Acta (paratenic) hosts, such as prawns, crabs and frogs; or salad Tropica 2015;141:46–53. and vegetables contaminated with slime of infected snails. 5. Mc Auliffe L, Ensign SF, Larson D, et al. Severe CNS angiostron Once ingested, the third stage larvae (L 3) penetrate the intesgyliasis in a young marine: a case report and literature review. Lantinal wall, reach the portal vein and from there enter the cet Infect Dis 2019;19:e 132–42.