66 A 32-Year-Old Man from Malawi With Pain in the Right Upper Abdomen and a Feeling of Faintness ANTHONY D. HARRIES Clinical Presentation Questions History 1. Based on the clinical history, examination and investigations done, what is the most likely pathology to explain A 32-year-old man from Malawi presents to a local hospital this man’s illness and what would be the most frequent with a history of pain in his right upper abdomen and a feelcause of the problem? ing of faintness, especially when standing up and walking. 2. What other investigations should be carried out? Outline He was well until 1 month previously, when he began to the immediate and long-term management of his experience a feeling of fullness in his upper abdomen. In condition. the week before admission he developed pain in the right upper abdomen that was particularly apparent when sleeping Discussion on his right side. He has recently started to feel breathless on lying down and feels faint, especially on standing up. His past This young African man presents with a history of right medical history is unremarkable, except for an episode of upper abdominal pain, breathlessness and syncope. On physa blistering and painful skin lesion 3 years previously ical examination, he has signs of cardiac decompensation that affected the right side of his abdomen around the level associated with right heart failure. It is likely that his skin of the umbilicus – this had healed spontaneously after lesion 3 years previously was herpes zoster. several weeks. Clinical Findings He is thin and slightly breathless in the supine position. His pulse is regular at 130 bpm with pronounced pulsus paradoxus measured at 15 mm Hg. Blood pressure in the supine position is 90 /60 mm Hg. The jugular venous pulse is difficult to visualize but appears elevated. The apex beat is impalpable. The heart sounds are quiet but audible; no triple rhythm and no heart murmurs are heard. Auscultation of the chest is normal. There is an enlarged tender palpable liver measured at 8 cm below the right costal junction and evidence of mild peripheral oedema of the legs and sacral area. Laboratory Results Haemoglobin 10.5 g/d L; WBC 9.8 G/L (4–10). Chest radiography shows an enlarged globular heart with clear lung fields (see 181 --- PAGE BREAK -- 182 Answer to Question 1 tapered doses for ten weeks, and antiretroviral therapy which What is the Most Likely Pathology to Explain This was started at 4 weeks after commencing antituberculous Man’s Illness and What Would be the Most treatment. He made a full and uneventful recovery. Frequent Cause of the Problem? The history, physical examination and chest radiograph find SUMMARY BOX ings all point to a diagnosis of pericardial tamponade caused by a large pericardial effusion. The cardiovascular manifesta- Tuberculosis tions of tachycardia, pulsus paradoxus, hypotension, impal In Africa the most common cause of pericardial effusion is pable apex beat, raised jugular venous pressure and quiet tuberculosis; and even if there is no confirmatory evidence of heart sounds are indicative of pericardial effusion. The pres- tuberculosis, patients must be treated with a full course of ence of syncope, pulsus paradoxus and hypotension are signs antituberculosis treatment. In countries in central and southern of cardiac tamponade indicating the need for a therapeutic Africa there is a strong association between tuberculosis and HIV infection, with over 50 per cent of tuberculosis patients pericardial aspiration. In Africa there are several causes of being HIV positive. The advent of the HIV/AIDS epidemic in pericardial effusion that include tuberculosis, other bacterial Africa was associated with a large increase in the number of infections, malignancy and HIV-related Kaposi’s sarcoma. patients being diagnosed with tuberculosis pericardial effusion. The presence of a previous attack of herpes zoster is a strong Once in HIV-positive patients not yet on ART, a diagnosis of pointer to HIV infection, and in this case the most likely pericardial effusion is made, it is important to determine whether tamponade is present, with the characteristic features diagnosis is HIV-associated tuberculosis. being syncope, tachycardia, pulsus paradoxus and hypotension. The presence of tamponade is potentially life-threatening and requires prompt pericardial aspiration. Diagnostic peri Answer to Question 2 cardial aspiration is usually unhelpful in the district hospital What Other Investigations Should be Carried Out? setting, because the fluid is often bloodstained and acid-fast Outline the Immediate and Long-Term bacilli are rarely visualized in smears of the pericardial aspirate from patients who have tuberculosis. If pericardial fluid is Management of His Condition. available for investigation, this can be examined with higher The most important investigation that should be carried out diagnostic sensitivity using the Xpert MTB/RIF assay (Cepheid, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) – a fully automated and commercially immediately is an ultrasound of the heart, which should available cartridge-based nucleic acid amplification test – which show the presence of pericardial fluid and sometimes fibrous allows a confirmed diagnosis of TB within 2 hours. The use of strands that are strongly suggestive of tuberculosis, especially corticosteroids is recommended, especially if there is tampoin highly endemic areas. An electrocardiogram is useful in nade. In HIV-negative patients and HIV-positive patients on showing low-voltage QRS complexes and in occasional cases antiretroviral therapy, randomized controlled trials have shown that corticosteroids may reduce the risk of death. For HIVthere may be electrical alternans. If there is pericardial fluid positive patients not on antiretroviral drugs, corticosteroids may on ultrasound, the patient requires a therapeutic pericardial reduce pericardial constriction. A commonly used regimen is aspiration to relieve the pressure on the heart and restore car- prednisolone administered in tapering doses during the first ten diac output. Once fluid is aspirated and the cardiac output is weeks of antituberculous treatment. WHO guidelines recomrestored, the patient should be started on antituberculous mend that antiretroviral therapy is started within 2 to 8 weeks of the start of antituberculosis treatment. Timely antiretroviral treatment and corticosteroids. An HIV test should be carried therapy reduces mortality, is associated with excellent immuout with appropriate counselling, and consideration given to nological and virological responses and reduces the risk of starting antiretroviral therapy after a few weeks if the HIV recurrent tuberculosis. test is positive. The Case Continued… The patient underwent therapeutic pericardial aspiration and Further Reading 500 m L of bloodstained pericardial fluid were aspirated. The blood pressure increased to 120 /80 mm Hg almost immedi- 1. Thwaites G. Tuberculosis. In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical ately. The patient was started on standard first-line antituber- Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 [ 2. Mayosi BM, Wiysonge CS, Ntsekhe M, et al. Mortality in patients culous treatment with rifampicin (R), isoniazid (H), treated for tuberculous pericarditis in sub-Saharan Africa. S Afr pyrazinamide (Z) and ethambutol (E) and also on predniso Med J 2008;98:36–40. lone at a dose of 60 mg daily. HIV testing was carried out and 3. George IA, Thomas B, Sadhu JS. Systematic review and metathe patient was found to be HIV positive. analysis of adjunctive corticosteroids in the treatment of tubercu The patient received a full 6-month course of antituber- lous pericarditis. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2018;22(5):551–6. culous treatment consisting of a 2-month initial phase of four 4. Wiysonge CS, Ntsekhe M, Thabane L, et al. Interventions for treatdrugs given daily (2 RHZE) and a 4-month continuation ing tuberculous pericarditis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2017;9: phase of two drugs given daily (4 RH), prednisolone in CD 000526.