69 A 22-Year-Old Male Farmer from Rural Ethiopia With Difficulty Walking YOHANNES W. WOLDEAMANUEL Clinical Presentation At the age of 20, he moved to the capital city seeking an alternative job. He migrated along with another young male History farmer from his village who had suffered a similar fate; he had weakness of both legs and arms, which he had developed A 22-year-old male farmer from rural northern Ethiopia preduring the same period of drought. There was no history of sents to a hospital in the capital with difficulty walking. cassava exposure in the region. His problem started 10 years ago, when he woke from sleep one morning and noticed weakness in both legs. There was no history of trauma and no prodromal symptoms; he Clinical Findings had been in excellent health before. The weakness in his legs rapidly progressed over 4 to 5 days, leading to him needing a An alert young man with a normal mental state. The gait is cane for mobility. He had no back pain, sensory complaints, spastic (‘scissor gait’), with foot-dragging and toe-scraping sphincter disturbance or upper limb symptoms. ( The start of his illness coincided with a period of drought ness of pyramidal pattern, with pathological brisk deep tenand famine, when his diet almost exclusively consisted of don reflexes and sustained foot clonus. Extensor plantar grass peas (Lathyrus sativus, local name guaya), which is response is elicited on the right, while equivocal on the left. known to be drought-resistant ( monotonous diet, he had been engaged in hard physical sensory or bladder dysfunction. labour on his family farm, where he was the main breadwinner, despite his young age. He lived with his mother and Laboratory Results three sisters, who took care of household chores; they consumed a similar diet but of overall smaller amounts of guaya. Full blood count, liver and renal function tests, cerebrospinal During that time, several similar cases of weakness among fluid, nerve conduction studies and electromyography young male farmers occurred in his village. His walking dif- are normal. His HIV-1 serology is non-reactive. HTLV-1 ficulty finally meant that he could not return to farm work. and -2 serology and MRI are not available. 189 --- PAGE BREAK -- 190 dragging, and toe-scraping. Questions muscle release surgery can be employed to lengthen contractures of calf muscles and hip adductors. Walking canes, foot 1. What clinical syndrome can you apply for a diagnostic braces and wheelchairs need to be provided. approach and how do you narrow down your differential Education to avoid consumption of L. sativus and meadiagnoses? sures to reduce toxin burden are important public health 2. What management and disease prevention plans can interventions. New cases of this preventable disease continue be used? to occur. Behaviour change communication among high-risk communities can promote positive practices to reduce toxin Discussion exposure. Such practices include the use of metallic cooking utensils rather than traditional clay pots to avoid accrued tox A male, teenage farmer from rural northern Ethiopia icity from iron-induced oxidation, addition of antioxidant develops irreversible spastic paraparesis. The onset of symp- seasonings, soaking seeds in lemon water and avoiding toms coincides with a period of drought when diet mainly unripe seeds. consists of grass peas. There is no sensory deficit and no bladder dysfunction. Another young male farmer from the same The Case Continued… village is similarly affected. The patient received physiotherapy and muscle relaxants; Answer to Question 1 however, this achieved only mild short-lasting improvement of his spasticity. A walking cane and wheelchair were pro What Clinical Syndrome Can You Apply for a vided. The patient was counselled to avoid further consump Diagnostic Approach and How Do You Narrow tion of L. sativus. Down Possible Differential Diagnoses? Upper motor neuron lesion with spastic paraparesis is the cli- SUMMARY BOX nical syndrome. Absence of radicular symptoms, sensory level, sphincter disturbance, back pain, non-progression, HIV- Neurolathyrism seronegativity and negative family history rule out most com- Neurolathyrism is a preventable toxic myelopathy caused by pressive, hereditary, infectious and metabolic myelopathies. excessive ingestion of the Lathyrus sativus grass pea. Clinical Among tropical myelopathies, HTLV-associated myelop- presentation is an irreversible acute to subacute spastic paraparesis or quadriparesis without prominent sensory athy (HAM) is highly unlikely. HAM has usually an insidinvolvement. Bladder and bowel function are maintained. ious onset and a slowly progressive course, bladder L. sativus is a hardy, high-yield pest- and insect-resistant impairment and sensory symptoms are prominent. Neuro- cash crop that can endure monsoon, drought or water-logging. cassavism (konzo) may also present with a sudden-onset spas- It has been consumed in ancient Egypt, Europe, South Asia tic paraparesis but is improbable in the absence of cassava and in the northern highlands of Ethiopia. Currently more than 100 million people in drought- and monsoon-prone areas use exposure. Male gender, pre-onset physical exertion, excessive L. sativus as staple crop. Being a multipurpose legume, it prolonged guaya consumption and a history of similarly makes a protein-rich, filling diet. It is an ‘almost perfect’ crop, affected village members favour a distinct form of toxico- were it not for causing disability. L. sativus contains the neunutritional disease called neurolathyrism. rotoxin β-N-oxalyl-a,b-diaminoproprionic acid (β-ODAP), a glutamate receptor agonist that results in excitotoxicity. Answer to Question 2 Toxicity is dose-dependent, and risk factors are prolonged heavy ingestion of grass peas, malnutrition, physical exertion, What Management and Disease Prevention Plans concurrent illness, illiteracy, male gender and young age. Can be Employed? Onset occurs within 3 to 6 months of monotonous excessive grass pea consumption. Weakness that develops sud Neurolathyrism is a preventable neurotoxic myelopathy denly or on waking from sleep is a classical presentation. Stage leading to permanent disability. Treatment is symptomatic 1 neurolathyrism presents with spastic gait and independent with anti-spastic drugs and physiotherapy. Tendon and mobility; Stage 2 is requiring a cane for mobility; Stage 3 is --- PAGE BREAK -- 2. Woldeamanuel YW, Hassan A, Zenebe G. Neurolathyrism: two requiring a crutch; Stage 4 is characterized by the inability to bear weight with resultant contractures. Ethiopian case reports and review of the literature. J Neurol By virtue of affecting young breadwinners of rural families, 2012;259(7):1263–8. neurolathyrism poses a high economic burden on poor com- 3. Tekle Haimanot R, Feleke A, Lambein F. Is lathyrism still endemic munities in a setting where no social services or disability in northern Ethiopia? – The case of Legambo Woreda (district) in pensions are available. the South Wollo Zone, Amhara National Regional State. Ethiop J Health Dev 2005;19(3):230–6. 4. Bick AS, Meiner Z, Gotkine M, Levin N. Using advanced imaging Further Reading methods to study neurolathyrism. Isr Med Assoc J 2016;18 (6):341–5. 1. Aronson JK. Plant poisons and traditional medicines. In: Farrar J, 5. Lambein F, Travella S, Kuo YH. Grass pea (Lathyrus sativus L.): editor. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; orphan crop, neutraceutical or just plain food? Planta 2013 [chapter 76]. 2019;250:821–38.