70 A 58-Year-Old Woman from Sri Lanka With Fever, Deafness and Confusion RANJAN PREMARATNA Clinical Presentation TABLE Laboratory Results on Admission History 70.1 A 58-year-old Sri Lankan woman who resides in a rural area Parameter Patient Reference presents to a local hospital with high-grade fever, chills, body WBC ( 109 /L) 8.5 4–10 aches, non-productive cough and progressive shortness of breath for 10 days. Two days previously she developed tin- Haemoglobin (g/d L) 12.4 12–16 nitus and hearing loss. One day prior to admission she Platelets ( 109 /L) 98 150–350 became increasingly confused. AST (U/L) 74 13–33 ALT (U/L) 68 3–25 Clinical Findings ALP (U/L) 126 40–130 On admission the patient is confused, with a Glasgow Coma Total bilirubin (μmol/L) 25.7 13.7–30.8 Scale score of 13 /15 (E 4 V 4 M 5). Her hearing is severely Blood urea nitrogen (mmol/L) 6.4 2.5–6.4 impaired (WHO grade 3). Temperature 39.3°C (102.7°F), heart rate 120 bpm, blood pressure 90 /60 mm Hg. There Creatinine (μmol/L) 123.8 71–106 are enlarged axillary lymph nodes on the right side. There is C-reactive protein (mg/L) 48 <6 no rash and no neck stiffness; Kernig’s and Brudzinski’s signs are negative. Scattered crackles are audible on auscultation over the bases of both lungs. Her liver is enlarged to 5 cm TABLE below the right costal margin and the spleen is just palpable. Cerebrospinal Fluid Results on Admission 70.2 Parameter Patient Reference Laboratory Findings Leukocytes (cells/μL) 35 (80 % 0–5 /μL Her basic laboratory results on admission are shown in lymphocytes) Table 70.2. Glucose (mmol/L) 3.25∗ 50–75 % of serum Her blood cultures grow no organisms; Leptospira and glucose Salmonella serologies are negative. Leptospira-PCR is not available. A thick film for malaria parasites is negative as well. ∗Paired random blood glucose 7.17 mmol/L. Questions Further Investigations Chest radiography does not show any pathological changes. 1. What clinical sign will you be specifically looking for? Her ECG shows sinus tachycardia. The EEG reveals wide- 2. What antibiotic would you include in your empirical spread slowing; the CT scan of the brain is normal. regimen? 192 --- PAGE BREAK -- Discussion The Case Continued… A 58-year-old woman who is a rural resident of Sri Lanka On day 2 after admission the patient developed coarse presents in a septic state with confusion and hearing loss. tremors of both upper and lower limbs associated with sac On examination there is a regional axillary lymphadenopathy cadic oscillations of her eyes in all directions with further on the right side. She looks ill and is septic on admission. deterioration of level of consciousness (GCS 8). At this point FBC shows a normal white cell count but slight thrombocy- a careful clinical examination revealed a well-demarcated topenia. The liver transaminases are slightly raised, but bili- crater-like lesion in the right axilla hidden within the axillary rubin and AP are normal. CSF shows slight lymphocytic folds. Doxycycline therapy was commenced and the patient pleocytosis, a mildly raised protein and a slightly decreased improved over the next 48 hours. She was discharged on day glucose. Brain CT scan shows no abnormalities. 6 after admission. Her hearing had returned to normal and there were no other neurological deficits. The patient’s O. tsutsugamushi IFA-Ig G titre came back Answer to Question 1 high (>1:4096), supporting the suspected diagnosis of scrub What Clinical Sign Will You be Specifically typhus. Looking for? Lymphadenopathy in the right axilla was detected on clinical SUMMARY BOX examination of the patient. Her acute presentation with signs of severe sepsis make an infectious aetiology of the Scrub Typhus regional lymphadenopathy most likely. It is crucial to perform a meticulous examination in order to establish the port Scrub typhus is a common cause of pyrexia in large parts of Asia and northern Australia. Its epidemiology has long been of entry of the microorganisms, which should be found in the considered limited to the Asia-Pacific area but in 2016 was also skin area that drains to the enlarged regional lymph nodes. first described in patients from South America. In Asia, infection with Orientia tsutsugamushi, the causa- Scrub typhus belongs to the tropical rickettsial tive pathogen of scrub typhus, is a common cause of infections and is caused by O. tsutsugamushi. The infection is fever, which is often associated with an eschar at the inocu- transmitted by the bite of an infected larva (chigger) of a trombiculid mite. lation site and enlargement of the draining lymph nodes. Infected mite larvae are found in a wide variety of habitats, However, the prevalence of eschar varies in different populafrom scrubs and primary forests to gardens, beaches, bamboo tions and its absence does not rule out the diagnosis of scrub fields and oil palm or rubber estates. Reservoirs of O. tsutsutyphus. gamushi are rodents and the mites themselves, which can maintain the infection by vertical transmission. Humans are Answer to Question 2 accidental hosts. The incubation period is 6 to 10 days. A painless papule What Antibiotic Would You Include in Your occurs at the site of the bite, which later ulcerates and trans Empirical Regimen? forms into a black crust or ‘eschar’. Patients present with fever, severe headache and myalgia, regional or generalized lymph In Asia, scrub typhus must be considered in every patient adenopathy and, at times, a macular or maculopapular rash. presenting with an undifferentiated febrile illness, regardless Conjunctival suffusions, vomiting and diarrhoea as well as of the presence or absence of an eschar. constipation can occur. CNS involvement is common in scrub typhus, and Therefore doxycycline should be added to the empirical presentations with diffuse encephalopathy or a reversible senregimen to cover for O. tsutsugamushi infection. Doxycycline sorineural deafness are well documented. In contrast, focal would also cover important differential diagnoses such as neurological signs are rare. Cerebellar, brainstem and extrapyother rickettsial infections and leptospirosis. ramidal manifestations have been reported, including opsoclo Chloramphenicol or azithromycin is the accepted alterna- nus,myoclonus andparkinsonian tremor. Further complications include myocarditis, interstitial pneumonia, ARDS and renal tive treatment if tetracyclines are contraindicated, as is the failure. Immunity is short-lived and strain-specific. case in pregnant women or patients with tetracycline hyper Diagnosis can be challenging and, in many resource-limited sensitivity. Children at any age with scrub typhus can be settings, remains clinical. The diagnostic gold standard is the safely treated with doxycycline. documentation of a significant rise in antibody titres in paired Of note, acute hearing loss or hearing impairment in a acute and convalescent serum samples. However, these serological tests are usually unavailable in resource-poor febrile patient from Asia should always arouse strong suspitropical areas. Despite controversies in sensitivity and specicion of scrub typhus. However, no single clinical sign or labficity, immunochromatographic rapid diagnostic tests have oratory test can rule in or rule out scrub typhus; therefore been developed for field use and are being used in the diagempirical antirickettsial treatment is given based on clinical nosis of scrub typhus in several endemic countries. ELISAand epidemiological evidence. A definitive laboratory diag- based tests have a high sensitivity and specificity. PCR-based nosis – if at all possible in the particular setting – can be tests have been developed and are mostly employed in genotypic characterization and for research purposes or as established by demonstration of seroconversion in paired diagnostic tools in high-resource settings. Culture of O. tsutacute and convalescent serum samples or by PCR on pre- sugamushi from the blood takes several weeks and requires a treatment buffy coat samples of an eschar biopsy. biosafety level 3 facility. --- PAGE BREAK -- 194 2. Premaratna R, Chandrasena TG, Dassayake AS, et al. Acute hearing Scrub typhus is very responsive to antibiotic treatment, which should be given empirically once the diagnosis is sus- loss due to scrub typhus: a forgotten complication of a reemerging pected. Standard treatment is with doxycycline 100 mg bid for disease. Clin Infect Dis 2006;42(1); e 6–8. 1 week. Alternative options include tetracycline, azithromycin, 3. Weitzel T, Dittrich S, López J, et al. Endemic scrub typhus in South rifampicin and chloramphenicol. America. N Engl J Med 2016;375(10); 954–61. 4. Saraswati K, Day NPJ, Mukaka M, Blacksell SD. Scrub typhus point-of-care testing: a systematic review and meta-analysis. PLo S Further Reading Negl Trop Dis 2018;12(3); e 0006330. https://doi. org/10.1371 / journal. pntd.0006330. 1. Paris DH, Day NPJ. Tropical rickettsial infections. In: Farrar J, edi- 5. Gaillard T, Briolant S, Madamet M, et al. The end of a dogma: the tor. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 safety of doxycycline use in young children for malaria treatment. [chapter 22]. Malar J 2017;16:148.