74 A 28-Year-Old Woman from Sierra Leone With Fever and Conjunctivitis BENJAMIN JEFFS Clinical Presentation Discussion History A young Sierra Leonean woman has a severe febrile illness with pharyngitis, conjunctivitis and chest involvement. She A 28-year-old woman presents to a small rural hospital in deteriorates on broad-spectrum antibiotics and antimalarials. eastern Sierra Leone with a 6-day history of fever, weakness, sore throat and retrosternal chest pain. She has had loose Answer to Question 1 stools twice a day for the past 2 days. She was seen in a local health post the day before admission and given a course of What is the Differential Diagnosis? artemether with amodiaquine and amoxicillin, but she had Adenovirus infections can cause conjunctivitis and pharyngitis continued to get worse on this. Her examination was unre- but these are normally mild. Also, measles presents with fever, markable except some mild pharyngitis. On arrival in hospi- cough, coryza and a striking conjunctivitis. It may also cause tal she was treated with IV ceftriaxone and she completed pneumonitis, but at this stage you would expect to see a rash. the course of her antimalarial medications. Her malaria slide Mycoplasma pneumoniae can cause a pharyngitis and was negative. She remained on this treatment for 2 days but pneumonia but is rarely severe. Other forms of pneumonia continued to get worse. are possible but do not normally cause conjunctivitis. On the second day after admission she develops conjunc- Leptospirosis can start with a non-specific febrile illness. tivitis. By this stage she is very unwell and is unable to walk Pulmonary involvement including haemorrhages is common unaided. She has developed a cough and breathlessness. and it can cause renal impairment. Patients with severe leptospirosis tend to present with conjunctival suffusions rather Physical Examination than with conjunctivitis. Typhoid can present as a non-specific febrile illness. You Axillary temperature 38.2°C (100.8°F), blood pressure would expect the patient to eventually improve on ceftriax 80 /55 mm Hg, pulse rate 100 bpm. On chest auscultation one, but prolonged clinical courses in typhoid are not she has bilateral fine crepitations. uncommon. Pharyngitis and conjunctivitis are usually not part of the clinical picture. Investigations Lassa fever is quite common in Eastern Sierra Leone, accounting for 16–20 % of hospital admissions in some stud Her chest radiograph reveals diffuse bilateral infiltrates. ies. All the signs and symptoms the patient has are consistent Blood chemistry shows mild renal impairment and raised with Lassa fever. transaminases (aspartate transaminase (AST/GOT) 514 U/L (<50 U/L)). Answer to Question 2 What Tests Would You do and How Would You Questions Manage the Patient? 1. What is the differential diagnosis? Lassa fever is a serious disease. It has caused nosocomial out 2. What tests would you do and how would you manage the breaks in which many medical staff have died. Therefore all patient? procedures should be done with caution and the possibility 205 --- PAGE BREAK -- 206 should be handled with care by experienced staff. After significant occupational exposure to the bodily fluid of a patient with Lassa fever such as a needlestick injury, post-exposure prophylaxis with oral ribavirin should be considered. The treatment for Lassa fever is with IV ribavirin, which is expensive and not commonly available. It seems to improve survival, particularly when given during the first 6 days of Mali symptomatic disease, but the quality of studies on this are poor. The Case Continued… Guinea Sierra Liberia Nigeria The diagnosis of Lassa fever was confirmed with antigen test Leone ing and the patient received IV ribavirin in a specialist isolation unit. Unfortunately, the patient was already very unwell by this stage and died 2 days later. All of the patient’s family, close friends and medical staff were interviewed to determine Zambia whether they had had contact with the patient. All contacts were advised to monitor their temperature and seek medical help if they became unwell within 21 days of the contact. SUMMARY BOX Lassa Fever Lassa fever is a severe systemic disease caused by infection arenaviruses known to cause haemorrhagic fever, Lassa and Lujo, are omys and infections in humans are likely to result from contact shown. Countries where clinical cases of Lassa fever have been with infected rat urine. Lassa fever is common in Liberia, Sierra confirmed are depicted in green. Indirect evidence, such as anecdotal Leone, Ghana and Nigeria, although it probably occurs in a reports or seroprevalence data, exists for most of the other countries much larger area of sub-Saharan West Africa ( in West Africa, shown in red. Endemic countries for Lujo virus are shown have been imported to Europe from other countries such as in blue. Incidence and risk of disease may vary significantly within each Mali, Co^te d’Ivoire and Togo. There are up to 300000 cases country. (Adapted from Farrar, J., Hotez, P., Junghanss, T., et al., estimated a year with 5000 deaths, although the confidence 2013. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. In: Farrar, J. (Ed.) 23 rd ed. Elsevier, limits of this estimate are likely to be very broad. London. Most cases are thought to be mild and patients may not even present to a health facility; but in hospitalized patients, the case fatality rate may be as high as 20 %. Lassa fever is more severe in pregnant women, with a higher case fatality rate in the of Lassa fever should always be discussed with the laboratory. third trimester. It frequently results in premature labour or All specimens should be transported in sealed plastic spontaneous abortion and about 90 % of fetuses of women containers. infected with Lassa fever die. Serological and PCR tests are available for the diagnosis of The incubation period is 3 to 21 days. In individuals who are not pregnant the disease normally starts insidiously with fever, Lassa fever, and an antigen-based rapid point-of-care test has body aches and weakness. Sore throat and retrosternal chest been licensed. pain are common, as are vague abdominal symptoms such as PCR tests are the most sensitive but are not available in pain, diarrhoea and vomiting. Cough and breathlessness may most African countries. Antigen tests demonstrate the pres- occur in some patients. Conjunctivitis is common, especially ence of the disease but may not detect low levels of the virus, late in the disease. Frank bleeding is rare. Raised liver transaminases are markers of severity and are associated with a especially if taken in the first days of illness. Ig M antibody higher case fatality rate. tests can show a high rate of false positive tests and may Serological and PCR tests are available for the diagnosis of be hard to interpret. Lassa fever, and antigen-based rapid point-of-care tests have The patient needs to be isolated until the results of the been licensed, although more testing on the sensitivity for dif Lassa fever tests are known. Because the infection spreads ferent strains is needed. Because Lassa fever is common, it should be considered in through contact with blood or body fluids, the use of goggles, anyone with an unexplained febrile condition who has visited an masks, double gloves and disposable (waterproof) surgical endemic area within the past 21 days and appropriate infection gowns is recommended when handling the patient until the control precautions should be implemented. It is more common diagnosis of a viral haemorrhagic fever has been ruled out. in people from rural than urban areas, but it does occur in The patient should be isolated in a side room, which should towns. Treatment with IV ribavirin is likely to be beneficial if given early in the disease, but it should also be considered in patients ideally have an area outside for decontamination (i. e. removwho are diagnosed late. ing potentially contaminated clothing). Needles and sharps --- PAGE BREAK -- Further Reading 4. Mc Cormick JB, King IJ, Webb PA, et al. Lassa fever. Effective therapy with ribavirin. N Engl J Med 1986;314(1):20–6. 1. Blumberg L, Enria D, Bausch DG. Viral haemorrhagic fevers. 5. Bonwitt J, Kelly AH, Ansumana R, et al. Rat-atouille: a mixed In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. method study to characterize rodent hunting and consumption London: Elsevier; 2013 [ 2. Houlihan C, Behrens R. Lassa fever. BMJ 2017;358:j 2986. 3. Mc Cormick JB, Webb PA, Krebs JW, et al. A prospective study of the epidemiology and ecology of Lassa fever. J Infect Dis 1987;155(3):437–44.