77 A 51-Year-Old Female Traveller Returning from Central America With Conjunctivitis, Rash and Peripheral Oedema ANDREAS NEUMAYR AND JOHANNES BLUM Clinical Presentation History A 51-year-old female Swiss traveller presented to the outpatient department 6 days after returning from a 2-week holiday to Guatemala and El Salvador. Four days after her return, the patient noticed a generalized slightly pruritic maculopapular rash on the face, trunk, and extremities. There was no fever and no other accompanying symptoms. On the next day the rash worsened and a non-purulent bilateral conjunctivitis developed. The patient did not report any chronic underlying disease nor the intake of any medication. Clinical Findings oedema of the patient. The patient was afebrile. Upon inspection there was con- Discussion junctivitis and a generalised maculopapular rash, also involving the face. Additionally, the patient showed tender oedema Six days after returning from a 2-week holiday to Guateof the hands, elbows, knees and feet ( also generalized lymphadenopathy (cervical, axillary, and presents with a slightly pruritic disseminated maculoinguinal). papular rash, conjunctivitis, peripheral painful oedema (hands, elbows, knees and feet) and a generalized lym Laboratory results phadenopathy. The full blood count was normal. CRP was 8 mg/L (<5) and Answer to Question 1 creatinine was very mildly elevated (87 μmol/L, range 35–80 What Are Your Differential Diagnoses? μmol/L). Liver function tests were normal. The clinical presentation is highly suggestive of an arbo Questions viral infection, which is also in line with the putative incubation period. The three most important arboviral 1. What are your differential diagnoses? infections in Central and South America are dengue, chi 2. What diagnostic tests would you perform? kungunya and zika. Dengue is endemic throughout much 214 --- PAGE BREAK -- Comparative Clinical Symptom Patterns TABLE Observed in Dengue, Chikungunya 77.1 and Zika Infections. Dengue Chikungunya Zika Incubation period 4–10 3–7 3–12 (days) Asymptomatic 50–80 3–28 80 infection (%) Fever +++ +++ + Headache +++ ++ + Conjunctivitis - - ++ convalescent) serum samples. In resource-poor countries, as well as in daily clinical practice in travel medicine, rapid diag Arthralgias ++ +++ + nostic tests (RDTs) for dengue (testing for NS 1-Ag, Ig M, and Myalgias ++ + + Ig G) and chikungunya (testing for Ig M) are widely available Skin rash ++ ++ +++ and often the primarily performed diagnostic tests. RDTs to Peripheral oedema - - ++ diagnose Zika virus infections are under development. In our case, RDTs for dengue and chikungunya were Haemorrhagic ++ (+) negative. manifestations Circulatory collapse/ + - The Case continued… shock Thrombocytopenia ++ ++ - Because the performed RDTs for dengue and chikungunya Lymphadenopathy ++ ++ + both showed a negative result, the patient’s blood samples were sent to a reference laboratory for arboviruses and our clinical suspicion of a Zika virus infection was confirmed by PCR as well as seroconversion (Table 77.2). A rise in of Central and South America, and it is the most frequent arboviral infection in travellers returning from the tropics. Chikungunya was absent in Central and South America TABLE Blood Test Results until the virus was introduced in 2013. After its introduc- 77.2 tion, the virus spread to most tropical regions of the First Second American continent. Zika was absent in Central and serum serum South America until 2015, when the virus was introduced sample† sample‡ Interpretation to Brazil and caused a pandemic affecting most tropical regions of the American continent in the subsequent Dengue Ig M negative negative negative years. IIFT Acute dengue, chikungunya, and zika infections have Dengue Ig G 1:20 1:5120 cross-reactivity similar presentations and may be clinically indistinguishable. IIFT However, the presence of a skin rash, conjunctivitis and Dengue negative negative negative peripheral oedema in an afebrile patient is highly suggestive NS 1-Ag of a Zika virus infection (Table 77.1). Chikungunya negative ND negative Answer to Question 2 Ig M ELISA What Diagnostic Tests Would You Perform? Chikungunya ND negative negative Ig M IIFT When testing for arboviral infections, the kinetics of the dif Chikungunya ND negative negative ferent test parameters have to be taken into account. During Ig G IIFT the early phase of infection, viral RNA and viral antigen (e. g. dengue specific NS 1) are circulating in the blood and can be Zika Ig M IIFT negative 1:640 positive detected by RT-PCR and specific antigen assays, respec- Zika Ig G IIFT 1:20 1:5120 positive tively. After some days, viraemia is fading, terminated by Zika RT-PCR positive ND positive the host’s immune response, and viral RNA and antigen become undetectable in the blood samples, while now spe- †obtained 6 days after onset of symptoms cific Ig M and Ig G rise and become detectable ( IIFT: Indirect Immunofluorescence Test; RT-PCR: real-time reverse The diagnosis is made by the detection of viral RNA, viral transcription polymerase chain reaction; ELISA: Enzyme-linked antigen or specific Ig M, or by the documentation of a four- Immunosorbent Assay; ND: not done. fold rise of specific Ig G antibody titres in paired (acute and --- PAGE BREAK -- 216 anti-Dengue Ig G was interpreted as cross-reactivity which is virus RNA detection in urine provides a feasible alternative: ZIKV common among viruses of the same family. is detectable with higher RNA loads and for a longer period (10– 20 days after onset of symptoms) in urine samples than in serum samples. SUMMARY BOX Arboviral infections are self-limiting and, in the absence of specific treatment options, clinical management is exclusively Acute Arboviral Infection supportive. Special features of Zika virus include its sexual transmissibility, the potential to trigger post-infectious Guillan Acute dengue, chikungunya, and Zika infections have similar Barre -Syndrome, and, in the case of intrauterine infection, its presentations and are often clinically indistinguishable. Although ability to cause severe foetopathy (primarily microcephaly). the pattern of clinical symptoms can point towards the correct diagnosis, specific molecular or immunological tests are necessary to make a final diagnosis. Interpretation of serological test results demands some Further Reading caution, because cross-reactivity of antibodies directed against viruses belonging to the same family of viruses may be 1. Young PR, Ng LFP, Hall RA, et al. Arbovirus Infections. misleading. In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. Although dengue virus NS 1 antigen tests are mostly specific London: Elsevier; 2013 [ for dengue virus infection, serological assays may show cross 2. Baud D, Gubler DJ, Schaub B, et al. An update on Zika virus infecreactivity with Zika virus (ZIKV) specific antibodies (as in our tion. Lancet 2017;390(10107):2099–109. case). The diagnostic value of RT-PCR for detection of Zika virus RNA in the blood is limited because viraemia is usually low and 3. Peters R, Stevenson M. Zika virus diagnosis: challenges and solulimited to the first few days after disease onset. However, Zika tions. Clin Microbiol Infect 2019;25(2):142–6.