79 A 34-Year-Old Male Immigrant from Peru With Chronic Diarrhoea and Severe Weight Loss THOMAS WEITZEL AND CRISTINA GOENS Clinical Presentation TABLE Laboratory Results 79.1 History Parameter Patient Reference A 34-year-old man presents to a hospital in Chile with a 6 month history of severe chronic diarrhoea associated with WBC ( 109 /L) 11.7 4.5–11.0 colicky abdominal pain and weight loss of approximately Platelets ( 109 /L) 644 150–450 20 kg. For more than 12 years he has suffered from recur Haemoglobin (g/d L) 12.4 13.5–17.5 rent episodes of diarrhoea and abdominal cramps; the frequency of these episodes appears to have increased in the Protein (g/d L) 4.9 6.0–8.0 past 2 years. Albumin (g/d L) 2.2 3.5–5.0 The patient originates from northern Peru but has been ESR (mm/h) 26 1–14 living in Chile for the past 9 years. He reports that his Peru HIV test negative vian wife and children are healthy, but that his mother and one brother suffered from chronic abdominal symptoms of unknown origin, leading to wasting and subsequent death at the age of 45 and 28 years, respectively. Clinical Findings The patient is cachectic with a severe loss of muscle mass and a body weight of 44 kg (BMI 17). Apart from slight pain on abdominal palpation, the physical examination is normal: He is afebrile, liver and spleen are not enlarged, there is no palpable lymphadenopathy and no peripheral oedema. Laboratory results His laboratory results on admission are shown in Table 79.1. Other Investigations Abdominal CT scan and abdominal MRI are without any pathological findings. Oesophagogastroduodenoscopy appeared macroscopically normal. Histology of a duodenal tiple elongated structures (arrows) compatible with a helminth infection biopsy is shown in 220 --- PAGE BREAK -- Questions technique should be performed. The latter has the advantage of being technically simple and providing results within a few 1. Which helminth infections can cause such clinical manifes- hours. If stool samples are positive, respiratory samples and tations and which parasitological examination (s) should urine should also be examined for S. strongyloides larvae. urgently be performed to clarify the histopathology report? Answer to Question 2 2. Would you order any additional investigations? Would You Order Any Additional Investigations? Discussion Because S. stercoralis is the most probable cause of this severe disease, serology for HTLV-1 should be ordered. HTLV-1 is A migrant of Peruvian origin living in Chile presents with an important risk factor for S. stercoralis hyperinfection synchronic diarrhoea and abdominal pain, leading to severe drome, and Peru is endemic for this retrovirus. The family weight loss and cachexia. Laboratory values show signs of history of the patient also hints at this virus that is commonly malabsorption and inflammation. The physical examination, transmitted by breastfeeding. abdominal imaging and upper GI endoscopy are unremarkable, but the pathologist reports structures compatible with The Case Continued… helminth infection in duodenal biopsies. The patient was hospitalized and stabilized under symptom Answer to Question 1 atic treatment and parenteral nutrition. After the histopathology report was received, a fresh stool sample was sent Which Helminth Infections Can Cause Such Clinical to the parasitology laboratory for Baermann testing, which Manifestations and Which Parasitological demonstrated a high load of rhabditiform larvae of S. stercor Examination (s) Should Urgently Be Performed to alis ( Clarify the Histopathology Report? ratory secretions ( Chronic diarrhoea, malabsorption and wasting are usually treatment with ivermectin (200 μg/kg per day 7 days) not associated with intestinal helminth infections. Therefore was initiated and repeated after 2 weeks. HTLV-1 codiagnosis and treatment are often delayed. The two main hel- infection was confirmed by serology. The patient recovered minth species capable of causing chronic diarrhoea and wast- from diarrhoea and other abdominal symptoms within ing are Strongyloides stercoralis and Capillaria philippinensis weeks. Parasitological follow-up examination after 3 months (see Case 58). In immunocompromised patients, intestinal was negative. At that point, the patient had gained 13 kg and protozoa such as Cryptosporidium species or Cystoisospora belli was without postprandial abdominal cramps for the first might cause similar manifestations. Our patient originated time in more than 10 years. Baermann testing of the family from northern Peru, a tropical region highly endemic for and other household members revealed asymptomatic S. stercoralis. Routine ova and parasite stool tests might be S. stercoralis infection of his wife and one of the two children. ordered; but most importantly, specific tests to detect larvae His wife tested HTLV-1 positive, but both children were of S. stercoralis such as an agar plate method or the Baermann negative. sample. (B) Rhabditiform larvae are also present in a wet mount preparation of respiratory secretion. --- PAGE BREAK -- 222 Further Reading SUMMARY BOX 1. Brooker SJ, Bundy DAP. Soil-transmitted Helminths (Geohelminths). In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd HTLV-1-Associated Strongyloides stercoralis Hyperin- ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 [ fection Syndrome 2. Solomon T. Virus Infections of the Nervous System. In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; S. stercoralis is a soil-transmitted nematode, capable of main 2013 [ taining chronic intestinal infection through a cycle of auto 3. Keiser PB, Nutman TB. Strongyloides stercoralis in the immunoinfection. It is a poverty-associated neglected disease, endemic in compromised population. Clin Microbiol Rev 2004;17:208–17. most tropical and subtropical regions worldwide. Strongyloidiasis is not unusual in returning travellers, who typically present with 4. Carvalho EM, Da Fonseca Porto A. Epidemiological and clinical non-specific gastrointestinal complaints and/or eosinophilia (see interaction between HTLV-1 and Strongyloides stercoralis. Parasite Case 20). In immunocompromised patients, the parasite may Immunol 2004;26:487–97. multiply massively, resulting in severe and potentially fatal com- 5. Toledo R, Muñoz-Antoli C, Esteban JG. Strongyloidiasis with plications, commonly called “hyperinfection syndrome”. Corti- emphasis on human infections and its different clinical forms. costeroids play a major role as a risk factor for strongyloides Adv Parasitol 2015;88:165–241. hyperinfection syndrome. In addition, HTLV-1 infection is an important predisposing condition. HTLV-1 is a neglected retrovirus, which is primarily transmitted by breastfeeding, but also by sexual contact and blood products. It causes a Th 1-predominant T-cell proliferation and a marked shift towards type 1 cytokines. This immunological imbalance affects the Th 2-mediated control of S. stercoralis, with the risk of accelerated auto-infection leading to increased loads of Strongyloides adults and larvae. In HIV/AIDS, T-cell response is shifted towards Th 2 cytokines; therefore HIV infection is not usually associated with strongyloides hyperinfection syndrome, even though some cases have been described, e. g. in the context of immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS). HTLV-1-associated S. stercoralis hyperinfection syndrome mostly presents as severe chronic diarrhoea, malabsorption, and wasting. Disseminated forms, which are characterized by invasion of extraintestinal tissues (apart from the lung passage of larvae), a more rapid progress and a high lethality, are more typically found in patients under corticosteroid therapy. Because patients with hyperinfection lack common hallmarks of strongyloidiasis, such as eosinophilia and elevated Ig E levels, diagnosis is often delayed or missed. The drug of choice for patients with strongyloides hyperinfection syndrome is ivermectin given over prolonged periods of time (e. g. 7 days for two or more cycles). Patients with signs of dissemination (e. g. larvae in urine) should be treated with ivermectin and albendazole in combination with broad-spectrum antibiotics to prevent Gram-negative infections (e. g. sepsis or meningitis) commonly associated with larval dissemination. Management can be challenging in severely ill patients incapable of resorbing ivermectin from the gastrointestinal tract, e. g. in paralytic ileus, because no parenteral anthelminthic drugs are licensed for use in humans. However, parenteral ivermectin is commonly administered in veterinary medicine and some case reports describe successful subcutaneous treatment with a veterinary formulation of the drug. Because treatment failures might occur, patients require close follow-up. Family members should be screened for both S. stercoralis and HTLV-1 infection. Patients originating from endemic countries should be screened for Strongyloides infection before initiation of any immunosuppressive therapy.