81 A 33-Year-Old Refugee from Afghanistan With Recurrent Fever and Back Pain PETER SOTHMANN AND CASSANDRA ALDRICH Clinical Presentation Questions History 1. What are the most likely differential diagnoses in this patient? A 33-year-old male refugee from Afghanistan presents to a 2. Which investigations are useful to determine the German clinic with a 6-month history of recurrent fever, causative agent? night sweats and progressive back pain. After leaving Afghanistan with his wife and two children, the family first lived in a refugee camp in Iran. There, the patient started feeling ill Discussion about 6 months ago and was treated with tablets for several weeks. Initially he also received intragluteal injections. His A male Afghan refugee presents with a 6-month history of symptoms subsided whilst on medication but recurred after recurrent fever, night sweats and progressive back pain. Physthe treatment ended. After crossing Turkey and Eastern ical examination reveals localized lumbar spinal tenderness. Europe, the family reached Germany 4 months ago. All med CRP and ESR are slightly raised and an MRI of the spine ical documents were lost during the journey. shows spondylodiscitis of L 3 /L 4 with involvement of the psoas muscle. Clinical Findings The patient is afebrile and in fair general condition. Vital Answer to Question 1 signs are normal. On examination, there is marked spinal What are the Most Likely Differential Diagnoses in tenderness in the lumbar region. The remaining examination This Patient? is unremarkable. Spondylitis in a febrile young adult is likely to be infectious. Globally, tuberculosis is the main cause of infectious spon Laboratory Results and Imaging dylitis. Spinal brucellosis may be equally common or even Differential blood count, liver and renal function tests as well predominant in highly endemic countries, such as as LDH are normal. C-reactive protein and erythrocyte sed- Afghanistan. imentation rate are slightly raised at 26 mg/L (<5 mg/L) and Other infectious causes of spondylitis mirror those of 40 mm/hour (<20 mm/hour), respectively. Urinalysis is osteomyelitis and usually follow haematogenous spread from unremarkable. a distant site of infection. The spectrum of pathogens MRI of the spine reveals signal enhancement of the L 3 includes Staphylococcus aureus, pyogenic and non-pyogenic and L 4 vertebral bodies, the corresponding vertebral disc streptococci and Gram-negative bacteria such as Salmonella and the right psoas muscle, as well as disc space narrowing species. In addition, histoplasmosis, actinomycosis and and irregularities of both adjacent vertebral endplates melioidosis may be relevant causes depending on local ( 226 --- PAGE BREAK -- ing vertebral disc and the right psoas muscle, as well as disc space narrowing and irregularities of both adjacent vertebral endplates. Answer to Question 2 time to positivity (although this is less of an issue with mod Which Investigations are Useful to Determine the ern automated blood culture systems). Causative Agent? It is not possible to reliably distinguish spinal tuberculosis The Case Continued… from brucellosis by x-ray or CT/MRI imaging; microbiological testing is required. In patients from highly endemic Several blood cultures are taken but remain negative. Spucountries, serological testing and interferon gamma release tum samples are negative for acid-fast bacilli. A CT-guided assays (IGRA) are of limited diagnostic value, because they biopsy of the lesion is performed without complications. are not able to distinguish between active and latent/past Culture of the tissue sample reveals Brucella melitensis as infection. Definitive diagnosis requires isolation of the caus- the causative agent. No additional sites of infection are idenative agent from blood or tissue samples. tified on imaging. Importantly, there is no sign of endocar Spinal tuberculosis is rarely accompanied by pulmonary ditis on echocardiography. involvement, and sputum samples often remain negative. The presentation is classified as “complicated brucellosis” In brucellosis, the sensitivity of blood culture is generally with spondylitis and para-vertebral abscess formation accordhigh in acute disease and decreases over time. Bone marrow ing to WHO criteria, which requires a prolonged course of cultures have a better yield at all stages of disease. antimicrobial combination therapy. The patient is treated CT-guided percutaneous vertebral biopsy and subsequent with doxycycline 100 mg twice daily and rifampicin tissue culture and molecular analysis is the diagnostic gold 900 mg daily for 16 weeks. Additionally, intramuscular strepstandard in infectious spondylitis. Histopathology should tomycin (1 g daily) is given for the first 3 weeks of treatment. be performed simultaneously to rule out malignancy and The fever subsides after several days and inflammation to confirm granulomatous inflammation, which is a feature parameters return to normal several weeks after initiation of both tuberculosis (caseous) and brucellosis (non-caseous). of antimicrobial therapy. A second MRI at the end of treat It is important to notify laboratory staff that brucellosis is ment shows full resolution of the paravertebral abscess. One suspected: Brucella cultures are highly infectious and require year post treatment completion, the patient shows no signs of biosafety level 3 handling; they may also have a prolonged relapse. --- PAGE BREAK -- 228 as well as a prolonged course of treatment to avoid treatment failure and relapse. Preferred drug combinations of brucellosis SUMMARY BOX are doxycylin plus an aminoglycoside (streptomycin or gentamicin) or plus rifampicin. In neurobrucellosis, ceftriaxone is combined with doxycyclin and rifampicin. If contraindications Brucellosis occur, ciprofloxacin and cotrimoxazole may be used. Treatment Brucellosis is a common zoonotic bacterial infection and an duration is between six weeks and several months depending important differential diagnosis in prolonged febrile illness. Cur- upon organ manifestation and severity. rently, around 500 000 cases of brucellosis are reported to the Although most osteoarticular complications can be treated WHO each year, with global incidence rates increasing. B. with a standard course of 6 weeks’ duration, brucella spondylitis melitensis is the most common cause of brucellosis worldwide requires prolonged treatment for at least 12 weeks to avoid and mainly infects camels, sheep and goats. Frequent routes of relapse. Furthermore, surgical intervention may be required in animal-to-human transmission include consumption of unpas- cases of vertebral instability or epidural and paravertebral teurized dairy products as well as exposure to bodily fluids and abscess formation. aerosols during animal birth or slaughter. The possibility of airborne transmission requires special safety precautions while handling Brucella cultures in the laboratory (biosafety level 3). Further Reading In the early stages, brucellosis usually presents as a non-focal febrile illness. Clinical signs and symptoms are non-specific and may include night sweats, fatigue, lymphadenopathy and 1. Beeching NJ, Monir Makdour M. Brucellosis. In: Farrar J, editor. hepatosplenomegaly. Localized infection develops frequently Manson’s Tropical Diseases 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2014 during the course of disease and may affect the musculoskeletal, ( genitourinary, central nervous or cardiovascular system. 2. Gouliouris T, Aliyu SH, Brown NM. Spondylodiscitis: Update on Osteoarticular involvement is particularly common (up to 40 % of diagnosis and management. J Antimicrob Chemother 2010;65 cases) and often presents as peripheral arthritis, sacroiliitis or (Suppl. 3):11–24. https://doi. org/10.1093 /jac/dkq 303. spondylitis. 3. Pappas G, Akritidis N, Bosilkovski M, et al. Brucellosis. N Engl J Med Serological diagnostic tests are widely available but fail to 2005;352(22):2325–36. https://doi. org/10.1056 /NEJMra 050570. distinguish current from past infection in areas of high ende 4. Corbel MJ. Brucellosis in humans and animals. WHO; 2006. micity. Blood culture has a high sensitivity in acute disease and p. 1–102. tissue culture is considered the gold standard in localized infection. 5. Yousefi-Nooraie R, Mortaz-Hejri S, Mehrani M, et al. Antibiotics Brucellosis therapy generally requires a combination of for treating human brucellosis. Cochrane database Syst Rev antimicrobials with activity in the acidic intracellular environment, 2012;10(10):CD 007179. https://doi. org/10.1002 /14651858. CD 007179. pub 2.