82 A 31-Year-Old Man from Guatemala With Acute Weakness and Numbness of the Leg CESAR G. BERTO AND CHRISTINA M. COYLE Clinical presentation Discussion History A young, previously healthy man from Guatemala presents with transitory ischemic attack. Imaging reveals parenchymal A 31-year-old Guatemalan man with no past medical history calcified lesions, complex cystic structures in the subarachpresents to a hospital in New York City with several minutes noid space and an old lacunar infarct proximal to a cyst with of weakness and numbness of the leg. His symptoms resolved a normal CT angiography. just before his arrival at the hospital. Two weeks previously, he also had two episodes of facial twitching that subsided Answer to Question 1 without intervention after 10 seconds. He was born and lived in a rural area of Guatemala before What is the Most Likely Diagnosis and What is the immigrating to New York 5 years ago. In Guatemala, his Pathophysiology of This Disease? family owned uncorralled pigs and his house did not have These findings and the epidemiological risk factors are highly sanitation services. suggestive of subarachnoid neurocysticercosis. The clinical expression of neurocysticercosis is pleomorphic and depends on the location, burden of disease and host Clinical Findings His vitals were normal. Cranial nerves were intact. Motor and sensory examinations were normal. Deep tendon reflexes and gait was normal. The rest of the exam was unremarkable. Laboratory Results Cell blood count and serum chemistry were within normal limits. Imaging The computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) on admission are shown in Figures 82.1 and 82.2. A CT angiography showed patent cerebral arteries. Questions 1. What is the most likely diagnosis and what is the pathophysiology of this disease? 2. What is the approach to diagnosis and treatment? brain parenchyma (yellow arrows). 229 --- PAGE BREAK -- 230 arrow). Peripheral enhancement (orange arrow) is evidenced after the administration of gadolinium. Corresponding fluid filled septated cystic lesions (blue arrow) are seen surrounding the proximal middle cerebral arteries on T 2 sequence. An old lacunar infarct in the right frontal white matter proximal to an interhemispheric cyst was also found (not shown). inflammatory response. Disease in the parenchyma behaves Principles of treatment for parenchymal neurocysticercodifferently from neurocysticercosis involving the extra- sis cannot be extrapolated to those patients with SANCC. parenchymal space. Therefore clinical presentation and Antiparasitics are always indicated in the treatment of therapeutic interventions for each location are different. Sub- SANCC and many experts recommend dual therapy with arachnoid neurocysticercosis (SANCC) is probably the most albendazole and praziquantel. severe form of neurocysticercosis. In the subarachnoid space, The duration of treatment is still controversial, but curthe parasite can undergo an aberrant continued growth and rent guidelines recommend treating until resolution on reach large sizes, especially when it is located in the Sylvian neuroimaging. fissure. SANCC also has a high frequency of concomitant Corticosteroids are also critical to reduce the inflammaasymptomatic spinal involvement. Therefore an MRI of tion secondary to antiparasitic treatment. A careful taper the spine should always be included. of steroids should be employed to avoid complications, such The pathogenesis of the subarachnoid form is largely as hydrocephalus, meningitis, and vasculitis. Patients may mediated by the host’s inflammatory response. Clinically, need a long course of treatment with neuroimaging every it can manifest as meningitis, communicating hydrocepha- 3 months to assess the clinical response. lus, focal neurological symptoms and cerebrovascular disease. Increased intracranial pressure because of hydrocephalus is The Case Continued… the most common presentation. Vascular involvement is a common, but frequently unrecognized manifestation of A serum immunoblot for cysticercosis run at the Centers for SANCC. The inflammation of the vessel can result in occlu- Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) was positive. The sive endarteritis, aneurysm formation and thrombosis. Small serum cysticercosis antigen was positive at the beginning perforating vessels are most affected, resulting in lacunar of therapy. A spine MRI did not show evidence of spinal infarcts proximal to cysts as seen in this patient. In many involvement. The patient was begun on a high dose of predinstances, the CT angiography will be negative. nisone followed by a taper, and dual therapy with albendazole and praziquantel. After 9 months of treatment, his serum antigen was negative and his lesions resolved on imag Answer to Question 2 ing. He has been followed closely with no recurrence. What is the Approach to Diagnosis and Treatment? Imaging is the cornerstone in the diagnosis of SANCC. CT is SUMMARY BOX sensitive at detecting parenchymal calcifications, but MRI is superior in delineating cysts in the subarachnoid space and Subarachnoid Neurocysticercosis assessing the amount of inflammation. The serological gold Neurocysticercosis is caused by the larval form of Taenia solium in standard, the immunoblot, has a sensitivity of 98 % and spec- the central nervous system. It is endemic in Latin America, Asia ificity close to 100 % in patients with two or more lesions; the and Africa, where its transmission is favoured by poor sanitary sensitivity decreases in cases with a single or calcified lesion. conditions. The mechanism of transmission is faecal-oral and person to person, but requires the presence of free-roaming pigs The immunoblot is always positive in SANCC because of to perpetuate the life cycle. the high burden of disease. Circulating parasite antigen pro Subarachnoid neurocysticercosis is the most severe form vides additional information on the presence of viable cysts, because of the large dimension of the cysts, exuberant inflamand can be used to monitor efficacy of therapy. matory response leading to complications and slow response to --- PAGE BREAK -- 2. Coyle CM. Neurocysticerosis: an individualized approach. Infect therapy. Neuroimaging and serology are complementary for diagnosis. MRI is superior for the detection of subarachnoid cysts Dis Clin North Am 2019;33(1):153–68. https://doi. org/10.1016 / than CT, and the serological gold standard is the immunoblot. j. idc.2018.10.007. Compared with the parenchymal form, SANCC needs a longer 3. Garcia HH, Nash TE, Del Brutto OH. Clinical symptoms, duration and usually double the antiparasitic treatment along with diagnosis, and treatment of neurocysticercosis. Lancet Neurol corticosteroids. Neuroimaging and serum antigen should be 2014;13(12):1202–15. https://doi. org/10.1016 /s 1474-4422(14) repeated periodically to assess for clinical response and decision 70094-8. to stop treatment. 4. White AC Jr., Coyle CM, Rajshekhar V, et al. Diagnosis and Treatment of Neurocysticercosis: 2017 Clinical Practice Guidelines by the Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) and the Further Reading American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene (ASTMH). Clin Infect Dis 2018;66(8):1159–63. 1. Baily G, Garcia HH. Other cestode infections: intestinal cestodes, 5. Fleury A, Carrillo-Mezo R, Flisser A, et al. Subarachnoid basal cysticercosis, other larval cestode infections. In: Farrar J, editor. neurocysticercosis: a focus on the most severe form of the disease. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 Expert Rev Anti Infect Ther 2011;9(1):123–33. https://doi. org/ [chapter 57]. 10.1586 /eri.10.150.