87 A 27-Year-Old Male Traveller Returning from the Peruvian Amazon With Persisting Polyarthralgias ANDREAS NEUMAYR Clinical Presentation clinic for evaluation of a putative travel-related cause of his polyarthralgias. History A 27-year-old male Swiss tourist spent 3.5 weeks travelling in Clinical Findings the rainforests of the Amazon Basin in northern Peru. Dur The physical examination was completely unremarkable. ing the second week of his stay he developed an acute febrile The affected joints did not reveal any clinical signs of inflamillness with chills, malaise, frontal headache, generalized mation (no swelling, no redness, no effusion). myalgia and a transient, non-pruritic maculopapular rash. The rash started on the forearms about 1 week after the onset of fever and spread to the trunk, neck and face before Laboratory results fading after 3 days. In addition, there were slowly progressive debilitating polyarthralgias affecting the peripheral joints Full blood count was normal. C-reactive protein was mildly accompanied by transient joint swelling. He also noticed elevated at 9 mg/L (<5), liver function tests were normal. painful cervical and inguinal lymphadenopathy, which was self-limiting, lasting for about 1 week. Questions The traveller presented at the local hospital, where physicians made a clinical diagnosis of dengue fever, and he 1. What are your differential diagnoses? received symptomatic treatment with paracetamol. Although 2. What diagnostic test would you perform? the fever and the other symptoms subsided within 1 week, the polyarthralgias did not improve, showing a symmetrical Discussion pattern mainly affecting the small joints of the hands and feet as well as the wrists, ankles, and knees. A 27-year-old male Swiss tourist presents with persisting and Upon return home to Switzerland a few weeks later, the incapacitating symmetrical polyarthralgias primarily affectpatient consulted his general practitioner because of persist- ing the small peripheral joints after returning from a trip ing, incapacitating polyarthralgias. The patient reported stiff- to the Amazon Basin of northern Peru. The patient reports ness of the affected joints, mainly in the morning and after an acute self-limiting febrile illness accompanied by a rash immobility. Physical examination of the affected joints did before the onset of the polyarthralgias, which had clinically not reveal any clinical signs of inflammation (swelling, red- been diagnosed as dengue infection at a local hospital ness, effusion). Laboratory tests were performed including in Peru. serological testing for dengue virus, chikungunya virus, parvo Answer to Question 1 virus B 19, Epstein-Barr virus, Borrelia burgdorferi, Chlamydia What Are Your Differential Diagnoses? trachomatis, Salmonella Typhi, and S. Paratyphi but none revealed a cause for the symptoms. For two more months, Two main differential diagnoses should be considered in the joint pains did not improve; thus the patient was referred patients presenting with persisting or prolonged arthritis/ to a rheumatologist and subsequently to a tropical medicine arthralgias and a history of a preceding infection: 242 --- PAGE BREAK -- Reactive arthritis (Reiter’s syndrome): (circinate balanitis) or psoriasis-like skin lesions (keratoderma blennorrhagicum) may be present. Clinical manifestation Reactive arthritis is a rheumatoid factor (RF)-seronegative, may vary widely and patients may be oligosymptomatic. HLA-B 27-linked arthritis often preceded by an infection. In the majority of cases the complaints are self-limiting The most common triggers are gastrointestinal infections and subside under symptomatic treatment with non (caused by Salmonella, Shigella or Campylobacter) and sexu- steroidal drugs over weeks to months. ally transmitted infections (Chlamydia trachomatis). Reactive arthritis may manifest as monoarthritis (often affecting the Viral arthritis: knee or sacroiliac joint) or as oligoarthritis (usually of the lower extremities). The course may be additive (i. e. more Although self-limiting polyarthralgias are present during joints becoming inflamed in addition to the primarily the acute phase of many viral infections, prolonged polyaraffected one) or migratory (new joints becoming inflamed thritis/polyarthralgias are characteristic for certain viral infecafter the initially inflamed joint has already improved). It tions. Worldwide, parvovirus B 19, hepatitis B and C, usually develops within 2 to 4 weeks of the preceding infec- HIV, rubella and the alphaviruses are the most common tion. Reactive arthritis may also manifest with the classical infections to consider in the differential diagnosis. Although triad of symptoms termed “Reiter’s syndrome”: (i) inflam- rubella has become rare because of vaccination, the vectormatory arthritis of large joints, (ii) inflammation of the eyes borne, alphaviral infections are becoming increasingly relemanifesting as conjunctivitis or uveitis and (iii) urethritis in vant in endemic regions and in returning travellers (see men or cervicitis in women. Other musculoskeletal manifes- Table 87.1). Unlike reactive arthritis, viral arthritis primarily tations include enthesitis (often involving the Achilles ten- presents as symmetrical polyarthritis of peripheral small don) and dactylitis. In some cases, mucocutaneous lesions joints. TABLE Characteristics of Human Pathogenic Alphaviruses 87.1 Epidemiology and Endemic Occurrence and Number of Frequency of Main Virus Regions Reported Cases Symptoms (%) Chikungunya Tropical and subtropical regions of Asia, Large sporadic epidemics Fever: 90 Africa and Latin America Rash: 40–50 Myalgia: 90 Arthralgia/arthritis: >95 Sindbis Virus Eurasia, Africa, Australia, Oceania; Geographically most widely distributed Fever: 15–40 Group primarily reported from West Russia alphavirus (lack of data on human cases) Rash: 90 (“Karelian fever”), Finland (“Pogosta Karelian fever: rare (no data) Myalgia: 50 disease”), and Sweden (“Ockelbo Pogosta disease: 140 cases (range Arthralgia/arthritis: 95 disease”) 1–1282)/year Ockelbo disease: 30 cases/year Ross River Australia, Papua New Guinea, West 5000 cases per year in Australia; in Fever: 20–60 Papua 1979–1980 an epidemic with >60000 Rash: 40–60 cases hit some pacific islands (New Myalgia: 40–80 Caledonia, Fiji, Samoa, Cook Islands) Arthralgia/arthritis: 80–100 Barmah Australia 2000 cases/year Fever: 50 Forest Rash: 40–60 Myalgia: 50–80 Arthralgia or arthritis: 70–95 O’Nyong East Africa Rare epidemics; >2 million cases in Fever: 80–100 Nyong 1959–1961 Rash: 70–90 Myalgia: 70 Arthralgia/arthritis: 60–100 Mayaro South America, primarily the Amazonian Sporadic single cases and small Fever: 100 rainforest, Caribbean outbreaks (involving 10–100 cases) Rash: 30–50 Myalgia: 75 Arthralgia/arthritis: 50–90 Adapted from Suhrbier, A., Jaffar-Bandjee, M. C., Gasque, P., 2012. Arthritogenic alphaviruses - an overview. Nat Rev Rheumatol, 8(7):420–9. --- PAGE BREAK -- 244 TABLE Results of the Serological Testing for Alphavirus Infections Performed in Our Case 87.2 Blood Sample Taken on 29 August Blood Sample Taken on 12 September Virus Ig M-IFA Ig G-IFA PRNT Ig M-IFA Ig G-IFA PRNT Interpretation of test result Mayaro 1280 2560 40 40 2560 160 positive Sindbis <20 160 <20 <20 160 <20 negative Chikungunya <20 160 n. d. <20 160 n. d. negative Ross River <20 160 n. d. <20 160 n. d. negative Barmah Forest <20 20 n. d. <20 20 n. d. negative IFA: indirect immunofluorescence assay (screening assay) PRNT: plaque reduction neutralization test (confirmatory assay) n. d.: not done (screening assay negative [and epidemiologically not supported]) Answer to Question 2 exclusively incidental. The Mayaro virus (MAYV) circulates in an What Diagnostic Test Would You Perform? enzootic, sylvatic cycle (similar to that for yellow fever) involving forest-dwelling Haemagogus species mosquitoes as vectors The diagnostic principles for most alphaviruses are the same: and non-human primates as natural hosts. Infections in During the first days of the acute infection, detection of viral humans mostly occur sporadically, are strongly associated RNA in the blood by PCR may confirm the diagnosis. with occupational or recreational exposure in rainforest Beyond the acute phase, the diagnosis is based upon serolog- environments and represent spillover from the enzootic cycle. ical detection of specific Ig M and Ig G antibodies against the MAYV has so far been only reported from South America and the Caribbean. respective virus. Cross-reactivity within the same virus family Mayaro infection presents as a dengue-like, febrile illness is common. Reference laboratories therefore usually perform lasting 3 to 7 days. It typically manifests with chills, headache, parallel testing for potentially cross-reacting viruses (see retro-orbital and epigastric pain, myalgia, arthralgia, nausea, sitive screening assays followed by highly specific confirma- followed by desquamation). Haemorrhagic manifestations have been described but are rare. Like other alphaviruses, Mayaro tory assays. may cause debilitating and long-lasting polyarthralgias, which are suspected to arise from the inflammatory immune response The Case Continued… stimulated by the prolonged virus persistence in joint tissues. Treatment is exclusively symptomatic with non-steroidal drugs. Given the patient’s travel history, the course of the illness and Symptoms subside slowly over weeks to months. Permanent the clinical signs and symptoms experienced during the jour- damage of the affected joints is not reported. ney, Mayaro virus (MAYV) infection was strongly suspected. (Chikungunya was not yet endemic in the Americas at the time this patient was seen). Further Reading The serological results (Tab. 87.2) confirmed the suspected diagnosis of Mayaro infection. The patient received 1. Young PR, Ng LFP, Hall RA, et al. Arbovirus Infections. symptomatic treatment with ibuprofen, and the polyarthral In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: gias subsided slowly over the following weeks and months Elsevier; 2013 [ before finally disappearing completely. 2. Schmitt SK. Reactive Arthritis. Infect Dis Clin North Am 2017; 31(2):265–77. SUMMARY BOX 3. Suhrbier A,Jaffar-Bandjee MC,Gasque P. Arthritogenicalphavirusesan overview. Nat Rev Rheumatol 2012;8(7):420–9. Mayaro-Fever 4. Acosta-Ampudia Y, Monsalve DM, Rodríguez Y, et al. Mayaro: an Mayaro-virus is an alphavirus. Alphaviruses are arthropod-borne emerging viral threat? Emerg Microbes Infect 2018;7(1):163. viruses (arboviruses) that circulate among a wide variety of wild 5. Blohm G, Elbadry MA, Mavian C et al. Mayaro as a Caribbean travanimals in relative mosquito vector-specific and host-specific eler: Evidence for multiple introductions and transmission of the enzootic cycles; infection of humans (dead-end hosts) is virus into Haiti. Int J Infect Dis 2019;87:151–3.