91 A 20-Year-Old Male from India With Fever and Quadriparesis REETA S. MANI Answer to Question 1 Clinical presentation How Could You Secure the Diagnosis? What Are History the Differentials? A previously healthy 20-year-old man from southern India is A young male with a history of dog bite in a rabiesadmitted to a local hospital with fever and quadriparesis. endemic country, presenting with fever and rapidly pro He has had fever for 4 days, followed by tingling and gressive ascending paresis a month later should elicit a high weakness initially in his left leg, subsequently involving all clinical suspicion of paralytic rabies. Laboratory confirmafour limbs over the next 2 days. He gives a history of a stray tion must be done wherever feasible to rule out clinical dog bite (WHO category III) on his left lower limb 1 month mimics (Table 91.1) amenable to treatment and to instibefore onset of symptoms, for which he received five doses of tute prompt infection control measures. Testing at least anti-rabies vaccine (purified chick embryo cell vaccine), but three saliva samples at 3- to 6-hour intervals (owing to no rabies immunoglobulin (RIG). intermittent shedding of the virus in saliva), along with a nuchal skin biopsy for viral RNA by RT-PCR, can secure Clinical Findings the diagnosis in most cases of the encephalitic form of rabies. Though serological diagnosis has a limited role in On admission, he is conscious and his mental functions are normal (GCS 15 /15). His blood pressure is 110 /70 mm Hg, pulse 90 beats per minute, respiratory rate 26 breaths TABLE per minute and temperature 38.5°C (101.3°F). Neurological Clinical Mimics of Rabies 91.1 examination reveals a flaccid, areflexic quadriparesis. Syndrome or Disease Laboratory Results Guillain Barre Syndrome His blood investigations including serum electrolytes, renal Post-vaccination encephalomyelitis and liver function test are normal. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) shows 52 mg/d L protein (reference: 15–50 mg/d L), NMDAR antibody-mediated/Autoimmune encephalitis 60 mg/d L glucose (reference: 50–75 mg, provided a normal Campylobacter-associated summer paralysis syndrome serum glucose) and 340 cells/mm 3 (60 % polymorphs and Cerebral malaria 40 % lymphocytes; normal 5 cells/mm 3). Herpes simplex encephalitis Questions Arthropod-borne encephalitides (e. g. Japanese encephalitis, West Nile Virus encephalitis, etc.) 1. You are suspecting rabies. How could you secure the Poliomyelitis diagnosis? What are the differentials? B-virus (Cercopithecine herpesvirus 1) encephalomyelitis 2. How could rabies have been prevented in this case? Tetanus Discussion Snake- or Scorpion-envenomation Organophosphate poisoning A 20-year-old male Indian with a history of dog-bite presents with fever and rapidly progressive quadriparesis a month Illicit drug use, CNS intoxicants after the incident. He has received a full course of five active Psychiatric disorders anti-rabies vaccinations, but no anti-rabies immunoglobulin. 253 --- PAGE BREAK -- 254 the first week of illness, detection of rabies-specific anti- with severe exposures. Administration of human or equine bodies in serum (of an unvaccinated individual) or CSF RIG (or recently available monoclonal antibodies) could can aid in diagnosis, especially in cases where survival is have possibly prevented rabies in this case. prolonged beyond a week. If laboratory confirmation cannot be done ante-mortem, antigen detection by direct The Case Continued… fluorescent antibody (d FA) test or RT-PCR on brain tissue obtained post-mortem can confirm or rule out a diagnosis After admission, the patient developed autonomic instabilof rabies (Table 91.2). ity evidenced by increased perspiration and significant variability in heart rate and blood pressure. He developed dysphagia and respiratory distress requiring mechanical Answer to Question 2 ventilation on the third day after hospitalization. His How Could Rabies Have Been Prevented in saliva sample collected at admission was positive for This Case? rabies viral RNA by RT-PCR; a CSF sample was negative. The patient died because of a sudden cardiac arrest on Prompt and appropriate post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) the fifth day of hospitalization (9 days post-onset of after an exposure from a suspect rabid animal can prevent symptoms). rabies in almost 100 % of cases. True PEP failures are extremely rare and may occur because of short incubation periods resulting from multiple exposures on SUMMARY BOX highly innervated areas of the body like the face, neck, hands etc. or because of direct inoculation of the virus Rabies into nerves. Rabies is a progressive, fatal encephalomyelitis caused by In severe exposures (WHO category III) PEP consists viruses of the Lyssavirus genus (Order Mononegavirales, Family of thorough wound washing, active vaccination with Rhabdoviridae). Rabies lyssavirus (RABV), the prototype virus of anti-rabies vaccines and passive vaccination with anti- the Lyssavirus genus, is the most common causative agent of rabies immunoglobulin (RIG). While it may take about rabies, usually transmitted through the bite of infected mammals, 5 to 7 days for vaccine-induced antibodies to be produced, mostly dogs. About 61000 human global deaths occur because of rabies annually, mostly in Asia and Africa. RIG, which is locally infiltrated into and around the The incubation period is usually 20 to 90 days, but may vary. wounds neutralizes the virus deposited at the site of the Two distinct clinical forms of rabies are recognized: Encephabite and prevents its entry into the nerves. Even though litic (“furious”) and paralytic (“dumb”). The encephalitic form the patient received adequate doses of active vaccine, he rarely poses diagnostic difficulties because of the classical did not receive RIG, which is life-saving in individuals clinical features like hydrophobia, aerophobia, agitation and TABLE Tests for Laboratory Diagnosis of Rabies 91.2 Sample (s) Test (s) Detection Sensitivity Remarks Ante-mortem Saliva RT-PCR Viral nucleic Moderate to high sensitivity Testing serial/pooled samples Diagnosis∗ acid recommended to increase sensitivity Nuchal skin RT-PCR Viral nucleic Moderate to high sensitivity Full thickness biopsy and adequate hair biopsy acid follicles required CSF, Urine RT-PCR Viral nucleic Low sensitivity acid CSF, Serum RFFIT, FAVN, Neutralizing Low sensitivity in first week of Presence of antibodies in CSF ELISA Antibodies illness; rises with increased (irrespective of prior vaccination status) (RFFIT, FAVN); duration of survival (>90 % by and serum (in previously unvaccinated Antibodies 2 weeks) cases) diagnostic of rabies against viral glycoprotein (ELISA) Post-mortem Brain tissue d FA, RT-PCR Viral antigen High sensitivity (nearly 100 %) Gold standard for laboratory Diagnosis∗∗ confirmation (d FA) RT-PCR: Reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction; RFFIT: Rapid fluorescent focus inhibition test; FAVN: Fluorescent antibody virus neutralization; d FA: Direct fluorescent antibody ∗A positive test confirms rabies; negative test results cannot rule out a diagnosis of rabies completely ∗∗A positive test on brain tissue confirms rabies; negative test rules out rabies --- PAGE BREAK -- autonomic dysfunction; however, paralytic rabies may clinically This fatal disease can be prevented in most cases with mimic Guillain Barre syndrome (GBS), post-vaccination appropriate PEP after exposure. Pre-exposure prophylaxis is encephalomyelitis and other conditions (Table 91.1) posing a recommended in individuals at high risk, including travellers to challenge in diagnosis and management. Fever at onset, par- rabies-endemic countries. aesthesia in the bitten limb, rapid progression, quadriparesis with predominant involvement of proximal muscles, bowel and bladder involvement, percussion myoedema, presence of hydrophobia/aerophobia and CSF pleocytosis seen in paralytic Further Reading rabies can help differentiate it from GBS. Post-vaccination complications historically observed with nerve tissue vaccines used in the past are rarely seen with the currently used rabies 1. Warell MJ. Rabies. In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. vaccines derived from tissue culture or embryonated eggs. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 [ High titres of neutralizing antibodies in CSF and serum and 2. Willoughby RE. Jr. Rabies: rare human infection - common quespredominant involvement of grey matter in brain and spinal tions. Infect Dis Clin North Am 2015;29(4):637–50. cord on neuroimaging in paralytic rabies can help distinguish 3. Rupprecht CE, Fooks AR, Abela-Ridder B, editors. An overview of it from post-vaccination neurological complications. antemortem and postmortem tests for diagnosis of human rabies. Nerve conduction studies (an axonal neuropathy supports In: Laboratory Techniques in Rabies. 5 th ed vol. 1. Geneva: World rabies), neuroimaging and laboratory tests (Table 91.2) can aid Health Organization; 2018 [ in the diagnosis. 4. World Health Organization. WHO Expert Consultation on Currently, there is no specific antiviral therapy of proven efficacy for rabies. Management consists of symptomatic treatment Rabies: Third report. World Health Organization Technical Report and supportive care. Prognosis is dismal in both forms of rabies, Series 1012. Geneva: WHO; 2018. resulting in death within one to 2 weeks of symptom onset. 5. Fooks AR, Cliquet F, Finke S, et al. Rabies. Nat Rev Dis Primers Survival from rabies is extremely rare, though critical care can 2017;3:17091. reportedly prolong survival by a few weeks or months in some cases.