92 A 42-Year-Old Traveller Returning from Thailand With Fever and Thrombocytopenia CAMILLA ROTHE, MARIA S. MACKROTH AND E. TANNICH Clinical Presentation Questions History 1. What is your differential diagnosis? 2. How do you proceed? A 42-year-old German man presents to a hospital in Germany. For the past 6 days he has had a fever of up to 40°C (104°F), arthralgias and retro-orbital pain. Discussion The day before presentation, he returned from a 10-week A 42-year old German man presents with a fever for 6 days, trip to Thailand, where he had spent 2 months on Little Koh retro-orbital pain and arthralgias after extensive travel in Chang, an island in the Andaman Sea. After that, he spent southern Thailand. He is febrile, but otherwise physical exam 5 days in Hua Hin at the Gulf of Thailand and another 5 days ination is unremarkable. Full blood count reveals thrombocyin Bangkok. He has not taken any antimalarial chemoprotopenia, CRP and liver function tests are slightly elevated. phylaxis, which is in line with the national recommendations Rapid diagnostic tests for dengue and malaria are negative. in his home country for this trip. His past medical is unremarkable. Answer to Question 1 What Is Your Differential Diagnosis? Clinical Findings Given the clinical syndrome of fever, retro-orbital pain, On examination, GCS is 15 /15, Temperature 39.1°C arthralgias and thrombocytopenia after a visit to Thailand, (102.4°F), BP 156 /80 mm Hg, pulse 106 beats per minute, the most likely differential diagnosis to suspect is dengue respiratory rate 16 breath cycles per minute, Sp O 95 % on fever. Dengue is the most common febrile tropical disease 2 ambient air. There is no skin rash and no lymphadenopathy. seen in returning travellers from South and South-east Asia. Upon auscultation, his chest is clear. Abdominal examina- The duration of fever, however, is borderline long for dention does not show any intercostal tenderness, no tenderness gue. The dengue NS 1 antigen test reflecting dengue viraemia on palpation and no organomegaly. may already be negative at day 6 and does not reliably rule out the infection. Chikungunya and Zika are additional important arboviral infections to suspect. Laboratory results Influenza is another important differential diagnosis to FBC shows thrombocytopenia of 81 109 /L (reference: have in this patient. Fever and associated symptoms are usu 150–300) and is otherwise normal, CRP 55 mg/L (reference: ally of shorter duration but may last as long as 8 days. Acute <5), AST 62 U/L (reference: 10–50 U/L), ALT 106 U/L HIV infection may present with persistent fever and throm (reference: 10–50). bocytopenia, and possible exposures should definitely be Dengue NS 1 antigen test is negative, the rapid diagnostic inquired. Enteric fever presents with persistent febrile temtest for malaria (which detects Plasmodium falciparum- peratures and otherwise non-specific symptoms. Because specific histidine-rich protein II and the panmalarial aldol- food hygiene in Thailand is overall very good, typhoid and ase) is negative. paratyphoid fever are nowadays rarely seen imported from 256 --- PAGE BREAK -- this country. Malaria has to be ruled out in any febrile traveller returning from a possibly endemic area, thrombocytopenia also being a hallmark feature. Malaria is nowadays rarely seen in travellers returning from Thailand; however, overlooking it could be lethal. A negative rapid diagnostic test (RDT) does not rule out malaria because RDTs are of unsatisfactory sensitivity for diagnosis of non-falciparum malaria. Also, in falciparum malaria high parasitaemia may cause a prozone phenomenon with a false negative RDT. Answer to Question 2 How Do You Proceed? To reliably rule out dengue and indeed any of the arboviral infections, serology at this point is the diagnostic test of choice, because viraemia is short and Ig M should be positive by day 6 of fever. Convalescent samples taken 10 to 14 days thin film). later should show a further rise in titres. For diagnosis of influenza a deep nasopharyngeal swab should be obtained, and care must be taken to apply the correct technique. For acute HIV infection fourth-generation diagnostic tests which include p 24 antigen, should be able to diagnose acute infection. Western Blot may still be negative at this stage, but in case of doubt, HIV PCR would help establish the diagnosis. Blood cultures would be the appropriate test to rule out enteric fever. For malaria, microscopy (thick and thin films) remains the diagnostic gold standard. Three negative films taken on consecutive days are considered to safely rule out malaria. If malaria parasites are detected but the species remains unclear even at a referral laboratory, species-specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR) may be useful. The Case Continued… A thick blood film showed Plasmodium species trophozoites thin film). at a density of 920 /μL. On thin film however, the microscopist on duty was unable to determine the Plasmodium species. Based on the negative result of the rapid diagnostic SUMMARY BOX test, non-falciparum malaria was suspected. The patient was admitted to the infectious diseases ward. Treatment Knowlesi Malaria was started with atovaquone/proguanil 250 /100 mg, 4 tablets P. knowlesi is primarily a zoonotic parasite reported increasingly in once daily for 3 days. The patient rapidly recovered and was humans across South-east Asia. Its reservoir is in various species discharged on the fourth day. For further parasite differenti- of macaques. ation, malaria microscopy was repeated by the head parasitol- Knowlesi malaria is now recognized as the most common form of malaria in Malaysia and parts of western Indonesia and it is ogist. After intense reading of the Giemsa-stained thin blood increasingly reported from other parts of South-east Asia. film, 2 parasite-infected erythrocytes were identified with Its prevalence may have long been underestimated because morphological characteristics compatible with Plasmodium of the inability to reliably distinguish P. knowlesi from other Plasmalariae or P. knowlesi infection (Figs. 92.1 and 92.2). Sub- modium species, in particular P. malariae. PCR-based methods sequently, species-specific PCR confirmed the presence of a have been a major breakthrough in recognizing the importance of mono-infection with P. knowlesi. P. knowlesi. Rapid diagnostic tests lack sensitivity and specificity --- PAGE BREAK -- 258 2. Antinori S, Galimberti L, Milazzo L, et al. Plasmodium knowlesi: the for this parasite, and physicians practising in the region or seeing returned travellers from South-east Asia need to be aware of emerging zoonotic malaria parasite. Acta Trop 2013;125:191–201. these pitfalls. 3. Singh B, Daneshvar C. Human Infections and Detection of Plas P. knowlesi has a 24-hour erythrocytic cycle and therefore modium knowlesi. Clin Microbiol Rev 2013;26(2):165–84. causes a quotidian (daily) fever pattern with relatively high para- 4. Zaw MT, Lin Z. Human Plasmodium knowlesi infections in Southsitaemias seen in some patients. It may cause severe disease, East Asian countries. J Microbiol Immunol Infect 2019;S 1684– similar to falciparum malaria. Treatment is the same as for acute 1182:30078. https://doi. org/10.1016 /j. jmii.2019.05.012. falciparum malaria. 5. Froeschl G, Nothdurft HD, von Sonnenburg F, et al. Retrospective clinical case series study in 2017 indentifies Plasmodium knowlesi as most frequent Plasmodium species in returning travellers from Further Reading Thailand to Germany. Euro Surveill 2018;23(29). 1. White NJ. Malaria. In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 [chapter 43].