94 A 20-Year-Old Woman from the Democratic Republic of the Congo With Fever and a Vesiculopustular Skin Rash JOHANNES BLUM AND ANDREAS NEUMAYR Laboratory Results See Table 94.1 Clinical Presentation History A 20-year-old woman presents to her local hospital in a rural area of the Democratic Republic of the Congo with a history of fever, malaise, headache, dry cough, swelling of the neck and a disseminated skin rash, which appeared 2 days after the symptoms began. The skin lesions first appeared on the face and then spread centrifugally over her body, including the palms and soles of her feet as well as the oral mucosa. The lesions have developed from initial macules to papules, then to vesicles and finally to pustules. The oral mucosal lesions are painful and make drinking and eating difficult. The patient resides in a village, where people live from agriculture, she has no relevant past medical history and is the mother of three children. Clinical Findings Vital signs: temperature 38°C (100.4°F), pulse 110 beats per minute, blood pressure 105 /82 mm Hg. Disseminated uniform umbilicated vesiculopustular skin lesions, ranging from for the face, the hands and the feet ( Parameter Patient Reference lymphadenopathy with prominent swelling of the cervical lymph nodes. The examination of the lungs, heart, abdomen WBC ( 109 /L) (neutrophils: 4.4 and the CNS is unremarkable. lymphocytes) (73 %:21 %) 4–10 Haemoglobin (g/d L) 12.3 12–16 ESR 75 mm/h <20 mm/h 262 --- PAGE BREAK -- Questions monkeypox, but several features help distinguish the two illnesses (discussed below). 1. What are your differential diagnoses? Cowpox usually presents with a single lesion (unless the 2. What are the main criteria to distinguish these differential patient is immunosuppressed); fever and lymphadenopathy diagnoses from each other? are uncommon, therefore this seems to be less likely. Discussion Answer to Question 2 A 20-year-old woman from a rural region of the Democratic What Are the Main Criteria to Distinguish These Republic of the Congo presents with an acute febrile illness Differential Diagnoses from Each Other? which is accompanied by a disseminated uniform vesiculo Important criteria to distinguish the main viral infections pustular skin rash including the palms and soles of the feet presenting with a vesiculopapular rash include the distribuas well as the oral mucosa and a prominent cervical tion of the skin lesions, the stage of the respective lesion (s), lymphadenopathy. involvement of palms and soles, and the presence of fever and lymphadenopathy (Table 94.2). Answer to Question 1 What Are Your Differential Diagnoses? The Case Continued… The clinical manifestation suggests a viral infection and the morphology and evolution of the skin lesions is characteristic Currently, no specific vaccine or treatment for monkeypox is for a poxvirus. Although smallpox was eradicated in 1979 available and clinical management is exclusively supportive. and no cases have occurred since, a zoonotic poxvirus would Persons who have been vaccinated against smallpox in the be the primary suspicion, particularly monkeypox, which is past appear to have some cross-protection against monkeyendemic in rural regions of Central Africa. Varicella, caused pox; and if they get infected, develop milder symptoms than by the varicella zoster virus, is another febrile illness associ- unvaccinated persons. Our patient is 20 years old, and was ated with a vesicular rash that is often confused with thus born after the worldwide smallpox vaccination TABLE Clinical Characteristics of Viral Infections Presenting With a Vesicular Rash (Mc Collum, 2014)2 94.2 Monkeypox Smallpox Cowpox Varicella Incubation period 6–16 12–14 7–14 14–17 (days) Fever (°C) 38.5–40.5 >40 Rare <38.8 localized singular Rash disseminated, uniform disseminated, uniform lesion (s) disseminated, non-uniform (rarely disseminated) Lesion distribution centrifugal centrifugal - centripetal heterogeneous rash homogenous rash (lesions are homogenous rash (lesions are (lesions are often in Lesion mostly in one stage of mostly in one stage of - multiple stages of progression development); slow progression development); slow progression development on the body; with each stage lasting 1–2 days with each stage lasting 1–2 days fast progression Frequency of lesions on palms or common common - rare soles of feet Rash period (from the appearance of lesions to 14–21 14–21 21–56 10–21 desquamation) (days) Lymphadenopathy yes yes rare no Case fatality rate 1 %–10 % 10 %–50 % 1 %–3 % 0.13 % --- PAGE BREAK -- 264 the precise exposure is often difficult to pinpoint in areas where contact with animals through household rodent infestations and hunting or preparation of bushmeat from a variety of species is common. Outside endemic areas, there was an outbreak of monkeypox in the United States in 2003 associated with infected prairie dogs sold as pets. Although considerably less infective than smallpox, monkeypox can also spread from human to human through the respiratory route or by contact with an infected person’s bodily fluids. Transmission is believed to occur through saliva and respiratory secretions or contact with exudate or crust material from the skin lesions. Risk factors for transmission include sharing a bed or room or using the same utensils as an infected person. The clinical picture of monkeypox is similar to smallpox but shows a considerably milder course with a case fatality rate of 10 %. It is believed that the rising number of reported human cases in recent years is largely attributable to the waning herd immunity after the suspension of smallpox vaccination in the early 1980 s. In endemic regions, the fairly distinct rash of monkeypox is primarily a clinical diagnosis because neither commercial assays nor the required laboratory infrastructure are usually readily available. The definitive diagnosis is established by PCR, culture, immunohistochemistry or electron microscopy but demands biosafety level 2 laboratory facilities. Optimal diagnostic specimens for PCR are lesion exudate on a swab or crust specimens (stored in a dry, sterile tube without any transport media and kept cross-reactivity with other orthopoxviruses including previous programmes were stopped in the early 1980 s. She made an smallpox vaccination. uneventful recovery; however, with scarring from the skin lesions ( SUMMARY BOX Further Reading Human Monkeypox 1. Blumberg L, Enria D, Bausch DG. Viral haemorrhagic fevers. In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed London: Human monkeypox is a sporadic smallpox-like zoonotic viral exanthematous disease. It occurs in the rain forests of Central and Elsevier; 2013 [ West Africa. The virus was first identified in 1958 in laboratory 2. Mc Collum AM, Damon IK. Human monkeypox. Clin Infect Dis monkeys. Human monkeypox was not recognized as a distinct 2014;58(2):260–7. infection in humans until 1970. Then, during efforts to eradicate 3. Sklenovská N, Van Ranst M. Emergence of Monkeypox as the smallpox, the virus was isolated from a patient with suspected Most Important Orthopoxvirus Infection in Humans. Front Public smallpox infection in Zaire (now the Democratic Republic of the Health 2018;6:241. Congo). Although the natural animal reservoir of monkeypox 4. Reed KD, Melski JW, Graham MB, et al. The Detection of Monremains unknown, several lines of evidence point to rodents as a keypox in Humans in the Western Hemisphere. N Engl J Med likely reservoir. The sporadically observed human cases and small 2004;350:342–50. outbreaks are confined to remote villages and believed to result from close contact between humans and wild animals. However,