1 A 20-Year-Old Woman from Sudan With Fever, Haemorrhage and Shock DANIEL G. BAUSCH Clinical Presentation instruments, often brought into a specialized laboratory in the isolation ward, as long as the laboratory personnel are History properly trained and equipped. A 20-year-old housewife presents to a hospital in northern Answer to Question 1 Uganda with a 2-day history of fever, severe asthenia, chest and abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea and slight Is the Patient’s History and Clinical Presentation non-productive cough. The patient is a Sudanese refugee living Consistent with an HF Syndrome? in a camp in the region. She denies any contact with sick people. The clinical presentation is indeed one of classic viral HF. However, most times the diagnosis is not so easy. Although some patients, such as this one, do progress to the classic syn Clinical Findings drome with haemorrhage, multiple organ dysfunction syn The patient is prostrate and semiconscious on admission. drome and shock, haemorrhage is not invariably seen (and Vital signs: temperature 39.6°C, (103.3°F) blood pressure may even be noted in only a minority of cases with some 90 /60 mm Hg, pulse 90 bpm, and respiratory rate 24 cycles virus species), and severe and fatal disease may still occur per minute. Physical examination revealed abdominal ten- in its absence. The clinical presentation of viral HF is often derness, especially in the right upper quadrant, hepatosple- very non-specific. Furthermore, haemorrhage may be seen in nomegaly and bleeding from the gums. The lungs were numerous other syndromes, such as complicated malaria, clear. No rash or lymphadenopathy was noted. typhoid fever, bacterial gastroenteritis and leptospirosis, which are the primary differential diagnoses, depending on the region. Questions 1. Is the patient’s history and clinical presentation consistent Answer to Question 2 with a haemorrhagic fever (HF) syndrome? What Degree of Nursing Precautions Needs to be 2. What degree of nursing precautions need to be Implemented? implemented? The spread of Ebola virus between humans is through direct contact with blood or bodily fluids. Secondary attack rates Discussion are generally 15 % to 20 % during outbreaks in Africa, and much lower if proper universal precautions are maintained. This patient was seen during an outbreak of Ebola virus dis Specialized viral HF precautions and personal protective ease in northern Uganda, so the diagnosis was strongly susequipment are warranted when there is a confirmed case pected. She was admitted to the isolation ward that had or high index of suspicion, such as in this case. been established as part of the international outbreak response. No clinical laboratory data were available because, for biosafety reasons, such testing was suspended. Although it is The Case Continued. . . a reasonable precaution, the suspension of routine testing often causes difficulty in ruling out the many other febrile syn- Intravenous fluids, broad-spectrum antibiotics and analgedromes in the differential diagnosis and increases mortality sics were begun on admission. Nevertheless, the patient’s from other non-Ebola disease. Fortunately, many clinical lab- condition rapidly worsened, with subconjunctival haemororatory tests can now be safely performed with point-of-care rhage, copious bleeding from the mouth, nose and rectum 1 --- PAGE BREAK -- 2 subconjunctival haemorrhage are common. A fleeting maculopapular rash is occasionally seen. Typical laboratory findings include mild lymphopenia and thrombocytopenia, and elevated hepatic transaminases, with AST>ALT. Leucocytosis may be seen in late stages. The differential diagnosis is extremely broad, including almost all febrile diseases common in the tropics. Ebola and Marburg virus diseases are endemic in sub Saharan Africa, with Ebola virus typically found in tropical rainforests in the central and western parts of the continent and Marburg virus in the drier forest or savannah in the east. Evidence strongly implicates fruit bats as the filovirus reservoir, especially the Egyptian fruit bat (Rousettus aegyptiacus) as the reservoir for Marburg virus. Human infection likely occurs from inadvertent exposure to infected bat excreta or saliva. Male-to-female sexual transmission may occur months after infection because of the virus’s persistence in the semen, although these events are relatively rare. Miners, spelunkers, forestry workers and others with expo sure in environments typically inhabited by bats are at risk, especially for Marburg virus disease. Non-human primates, hemorrhagic fevers. In: Schlossberg, D. (Ed.), Clinical Infectious Disease. especially gorillas and chimpanzees, and other wild animals may Cambridge University Press, New York. Used with permission. Photo by serve as intermediate hosts that transmit filoviruses to humans Bausch, D.) through contact with their blood and bodily fluids, usually associated with hunting and butchering. These wild animals are presumably also infected by exposure to bats and usually develop severe and fatal disease similar to human viral HF. Most outbreaks are thought to result from a single or very few human introductions from a zoonotic source followed by nosocomial amplification through person-to-person transmission in a setting of inadequate universal precautions, usually in rural areas of countries where civil unrest has decimated the healthcare infrastructure. Because symptoms are generally non-specific and laboratory testing is not widely available, viral HF outbreaks are usually recognized only if a cluster of cases occurs, especially when healthcare workers are involved. Having been into caves or mines, and direct or indirect contact with wild animals or people with suspected viral HF, are key diagnostic clues, but these are not uniformly present. Outside consultation with experts in the Viral hemorrhagic fevers. In: Schlossberg, D. (Ed.), Clinical Infectious Dis- and public health authorities must be alerted. ease. Cambridge University Press, New York. Used with permission. Contact tracing should be undertaken to identify all persons Photo by Bausch, D.) with direct unprotected exposure with the case patient, with surveillance of contacts for fever for 21 days (the maximum (Figs. 1.1 and 1.2), dyspnoea and hypothermic shock (tem- incubation period for Ebola and Marburg virus diseases). Any perature 36.0°C, blood pressure ¼ unreadable, pulse contact developing fever or showing other signs of viral HF should immediately be isolated and tested. 150 bpm, respiratory rate 36 cycles per minute). She became Treatment is supportive. Antimalarials and broad-spectrum comatose and died approximately 24 hours after admission. antibiotics should be given until the diagnosis of viral HF is con Laboratory testing at a specialized laboratory established as firmed. Preliminary results from a clinical trial of experimental part of the outbreak response showed positive ELISA antigen compounds conducted during an outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo show very promising results, reducing and PCR tests for Ebola virus and a negative result for ELISA case fatality to as low as 10 % if treatment is administered early in Ig G antibody, confirming the diagnosis of Ebola virus the course of disease. Similarly, a clinical trial of an Ebola vaccine disease. in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and during the massive 2013 to 2016 outbreak in West Africa showed protective efficacy SUMMARY BOX of over 90 %. Filoviral Diseases Ebola and Marburg virus disease are the two syndromes caused by filoviruses. Microvascular instability with capillary leak and Further Reading impaired haemostasis, often including disseminated intravascular coagulation, are the pathogenic hallmarks. There are four known 1. Blumberg L, Enria D, Bausch DG. Viral haemorrhagic fevers. pathogenic species of Ebola and one of Marburg virus, with rel In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. atively consistent case fatality associated with each species, ranging from 25 % to 85 %. Ebola and Marburg diseases are London: Elsevier; 2014 [ generally indistinguishable, both with non-specific presentations 2. Vetter P, Fischer 2 nd WA, Schibler M, et al. Ebola Virus Shedding typically including fever, headache, asthenia, myalgias, abdominal and Transmission: Review of Current Evidence. J Infect Dis pain, nausea, vomiting and diarrhoea. Conjunctival injection and 2016;214(Suppl. 3):S 177–84. --- PAGE BREAK -- 3. WHO. Interim Infection Prevention and Control Guidance for 4. Lamontagne F, Fowler RA, Adhikari NK, et al. Evidence-based Care of Patients with Suspected or Confirmed Filovirus Haemor- guidelines for supportive care of patients with Ebola virus disease. rhagic Fever in Health-Care Settings, with Focus on Ebola. Lancet 2018;391(10121):700–8. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2014.