4 A 4-Year-Old Girl from Uganda in a Coma DOUGLAS G. POSTELS Clinical Presentation TABLE Laboratory Results on Admission 4.1 History Parameter Patient Reference Range It is the rainy season in rural eastern Uganda. A 4-year-old girl, Haematocrit (%) 17.6 30 previously healthy, is carried into the Accident and Emergency (A&E) Department. Her father reports that she was well until Platelet count 109 /L) 28 150–450 yesterday. She had a bad headache in the early afternoon but Malaria RDT Positive Negative later in the evening developed shaking chills. Believing this was yet another episode of malaria, a common problem in their village, the family planned to take her to the health centre in the morning. The child slept restlessly. At 5 a. m. today the family woke to find the girl was in the midst of a seizure, which Discussion lasted about ten minutes. It has taken 4 hours for the family to reach A&E and the little girl has not awoken. The child has A 4-year-old Ugandan girl is brought to the hospital unconnot had any recent head trauma and the family knows of scious with no neurological localizing signs, a supple neck, no other reason that the child might be ill. hepatosplenomegaly and a positive malaria rapid diagnostic test. Early laboratory testing reveals anaemia and thrombocytopenia. Clinical Findings Answer to Question 1 Her temperature is 38.7°C (101.7°F), pulse 150 bpm, respi What Is the Differential Diagnosis? ratory rate 36 breath cycles per minute and blood pressure The most important underlying aetiologies of coma to con 98 /40 mm Hg. She has no neck stiffness or jaundice. Capilsider are cerebral malaria, acute bacterial meningitis, viral lary refill is normal. There is nasal flaring with respirations. encephalitis and intoxication (particularly organophos Blantyre Coma Scale is 1 /5. Pupils are 2 mm and reactive, phates). Metabolic abnormalities (hypoglycaemia, or renal and extraocular movements are normal by oculocephalic or hepatic failure) and non-convulsive status epilepticus manoeuvres. She has no papilloedema on direct ophthalmosmay be primary causes of coma or complicate these infectious copy. With stimulation there is decerebrate posturing that and toxic aetiologies. Although there is no neck stiffness, she resolves spontaneously. On cardiac examination she has a is deeply comatose, making this clinical finding less reliable; gallop rhythm. Her liver is palpable 2 cm below the right the absence of neck stiffness should not lower the clinician’s costal margin and her spleen is 4 cm below the left costal suspicion of meningitis. Rapid testing shows that hypoglymargin. A rapid test for glucose is normal. caemia is not the cause of the child’s abnormal mental status and it has been 4 hours since her last clinical seizure, making Laboratory Results a post-ictal state unlikely. Laboratory results are given in Table 4.1. The World Health Organization (WHO) defines cerebral malaria as an ‘otherwise unexplained coma in a patient with Questions malaria parasitaemia’. This clinical diagnosis is, however, non-specific because of high rates of asymptomatic parasitae 1. What is the differential diagnosis? mia in those geographical areas where malaria is most com 2. What additional work-up should be performed? mon and the abundance of differential diagnoses. 10 --- PAGE BREAK -- People living in an area of high malaria transmission (such a complete work-up for non-malarial coma aetiologies as rural Uganda in the rainy season) may be frequently bitten (including non-convulsive status epilepticus) is indicated by malaria-infected female anopheline mosquitoes. Initially, in all patients presenting with WHO clinically defined this produces clinical illness (either uncomplicated or com- cerebral malaria. plicated malaria); but with repeated infectious challenges, a state of asymptomatic parasitaemia may be attained. There The Case Continued. . . fore in African children in a coma, a positive malaria rapid diagnostic test (RDT) does not rule out an underlying A lumbar puncture was performed. The CSF was clear and non-malarial aetiology of acute illness. In parasitaemic Afriacellular; opening pressure was normal. Blood cultures were can children in a coma, direct or indirect ophthalmoscopy taken, and mydriatic drops instilled to perform ophthalmosmay be useful in differentiating malarial from non-malarial copy. This revealed white-centred haemorrhages in both aetiologies of coma (see Summary Box). eyes. A diagnosis of retinopathy-positive cerebral malaria Answer to Question 2 was made. What Additional Work-Up Should Be Performed? After administration of artesunate 2.4 mg/kg IV in A&E, the child was admitted to the high-dependency section of the Although the child has a positive malaria RDT, a lumbar hospital’s paediatric unit for frequent monitoring of vital puncture should be performed to rule out bacterial meningisigns and serum glucose. Artesunate was repeated at 12 tis. If available, an electroencephalogram (EEG) may be useand 24 hours and then once daily. An EEG showed diffuse ful to rule out non-convulsive status epilepticus as either a slowing but no epileptiform activity. Twelve hours after primary coma aetiology or a contributor to illness. More admission the child had one short (1 minute) generalized seisophisticated laboratory evaluations (creatinine, electrolytes, zure that spontaneously resolved and did not recur. Forty bilirubin) may be useful but are seldom available in the geohours after admission her Blantyre Coma Score was 4 /5. graphical contexts where malaria is most prevalent. The child was discharged home on hospital day five, with An ophthalmoscopic examination to evaluate for malarial a follow-up appointment in the neurology clinic scheduled retinopathy may be helpful. The presence of one or more retafter 4 weeks. inal findings (retinal whitening, haemorrhages or orangewhite vessels with or without papilloedema) would lend support to a malarial aetiology of acute illness ( Children with retinopathy-negative cerebral malaria may be more likely to have a non-malarial aetiology for their coma. As both retinopathy-negative and retinopathy-positive cerebral malaria may be complicated by bacteraemia, bacterial meningitis, seizures and/or metabolic abnormalities, Central Hospital, Blantyre, Malawi (Courtesy Mr James Peck). SUMMARY BOX Cerebral Malaria and Malarial Retinopathy Cerebral malaria is defined as an otherwise unexplained coma in a patient with Plasmodium falciparum parasitaemia. Malaria kills almost 450000 people per year, the vast majority of them children younger than 6 years old living in sub-Saharan Africa. Many of these children have cerebral malaria ( In African children with parasitaemia in a coma, direct or indirect ophthalmoscopy may be useful in differentiating malarial tures of malaria retinopathy (Courtesy Dr Nicholas Beare). tification of malarial retinopathy during life was 95 % sensitive and --- PAGE BREAK -- 12 Further Reading 100 % specific for the post-mortem identification of sequestered parasitized erythrocytes in cerebral vasculature. Sequestered parasitized erythrocytes in the CNS are a pathological hallmark of 1. White NJ. Malaria. In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical Discerebral malaria and likely indicate that acute malarial infection eases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 [ was responsible for the patient’s illness and death. In these 2. Mac Cormick IJ, Beare NA, Taylor TE, et al. Cerebral malaria in autopsy studies, children who fulfilled WHO clinical criteria for children: using the retina to study the brain. Brain 2014;137(8): cerebral malaria but lacked malarial retinopathy (i. e. they had 2119–42. retinopathy-negative cerebral malaria) had other non-malarial 3. Taylor TE, Fu WJ, Carr RA, et al. Differentiating the pathologies of aetiologies of death on autopsy, including systemic infections cerebral malaria by postmortem parasite counts. Nat Med 2004; (pneumonia) and Reye syndrome. In contrast, an epidemiological 10(2):143–5. modelling study in children with retinopathy-negative cerebral 4. Small DS, Taylor TE, Postels DG, et al. Evidence from a natural malaria showed that the attributable fraction of disease as a result of malaria infection itself is at least 85 %. The proportion of children experiment that malaria parasitemia is pathogenic in retinopathywith retinopathy-negative (cerebral) malaria who have non- negative cerebral malaria. Elife 2017;6:e 23699. malarial etiologies of coma remains unknown. 5. Taylor TE, Molyneux ME. The pathogenesis of pediatric cerebral The mainstay of therapy is antimalarials, intensive supportive malaria: eye exams, autopsies, and neuroimaging. Ann N Y Acad Sci care and diagnosis and treatment of non-malarial infectious and 2015;1342:44–52. non-infectious contributors to illness. Even in specialized centres, the case fatality rate for cerebral malaria is 15 % to 25 %. One-third of survivors are left with neurological sequelae, including epilepsy, cognitive impairment, attention problems and behavioural disorders.