5 A 4-Year-Old Boy from Laos With a Lesion of the Lip and Cheek M. LEILA SROUR Clinical Findings Case Presentation The 4-year-old child appears small and quiet. He is stunted History and thin. His mouth has a gangrenous lesion that has You are sent a picture of a 4-year-old boy taken by a visitor at destroyed part of his upper and lower lips and cheek, exposa remote district hospital in Laos ( limited history and physical examination: Three days ago, the family noticed a dark sore on the child’s cheek. The Questions child’s breath smells bad, he is not eating and he appears listless. The lesion progressed quickly from a sore to eat through 1. What is your differential diagnosis? the child’s cheek. The child, who is unimmunized, had a 2. What should you recommend to help this child? fever and rash about 2 months ago and recovered. The family is very poor. The local doctors do not recognize this disease. Discussion This chronically malnourished child, living in a remote village of a poor developing country, has a rapidly advancing gangrenous lesion of the face. Answer to Question 1 What Is Your Differential Diagnosis? A few days earlier, when the child had a sore on the face and bad breath, you may have suspected a tooth abscess and cellulitis. The rapid destruction of tissue is typical of noma, an opportunistic infection that affects poor children whose immune systems are compromised by malnutrition and often other infections, commonly measles or malaria. Other ulcerating facial lesions such as oral cancer, syphilis and yaws are unlikely in a young child. Cutaneous leishmaniasis is unlikely to develop at such a rapid pace and be so destructive. Mucocutaneous leishmaniasis may lead to severe tissue destruction but it is non-endemic in Laos. There are no diagnostic laboratory tests because the diagnosis is made right cheek. 13 --- PAGE BREAK -- 14 Answer to Question 2 SUMMARY BOX What Should You Recommend to Help This Child? Noma You recommend treating the child with penicillin and met- Noma is an opportunistic infection, primarily affecting children ronidazole to cover the suspected aerobic and anaerobic oro- aged 1 to 7 years, whose immunity is compromised by malnupharyngeal bacteria. You emphasize the need for nutritional trition and vitamin deficiencies. Risk factors include extreme poverty, malnutrition, poor oral hygiene, viral infections (especially support, which can be challenging with a mouth lesion. measles and HIV), poor sanitation and living in close proximity to Local foods, including eggs, milk, soy products and peanuts, livestock. The true aetiology of noma is unknown. The pathocan be liquefied and fed orally or enterally. Other diseases genesis appears to be a complex combination of factors, such as malaria, intestinal parasites, tuberculosis and vitamin including poverty, poor oral hygiene facilitating necrotizing deficiencies should be looked for and treated. Necrotic tissue ulcerative gingivitis, malnutrition and infectious diseases such as malaria and measles leading to impaired immunity. can be removed. Physiotherapy will be needed to prevent Noma is a neglected and forgotten disease, because it pricontractures with healing. Reconstructive surgery should marily affects the poorest children living in remote areas of not be attempted for at least 1 year and be done only by developing countries. Health workers throughout the world often an experienced surgical team. Improved nutrition before sur- do not recognize this disease, so it remains underreported and gery may improve the outcome. unknown. Case fatality rate if untreated is 70 % to 90 %. Treatment with antibiotics and nutritional support can prevent disease pro Survivors of noma suffer from disfigurement and funcgression and save the child’s life. Survivors suffer with disfiguretional problems with speech and eating. They may present ment, functional impairment and psychosocial isolation. as young adults seeking help. Their history reveals the illness Noma is an indicator of extreme poverty and inadequate as a child of younger than 10 years of age. public health systems. The elimination of extreme poverty, provision of prenatal care, promotion of exclusive breastfeeding, immunizations, food security and improved nutrition for the The Case Continued. . . poorest children can lead to the eradication of this preventable childhood disease. The child was treated successfully with antibiotics and nutritional support. His face healed with contractures, resulting in Further Reading disfigurement and salivary incontinence. At age 9 years, he was referred for surgery by a visiting international surgical 1. Srour L, Wong V, Wyllie S. Noma, actinomycosis and nocardia. team. After two surgeries, his appearance was improved, In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. and the salivary incontinence corrected ( London: Elsevier; 2013 [ 2. Srour L, Marck K, Baratti-Mayer D. Noma: overview of a neglected disease and human rights violation. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2017; 96(2):268–74. 3. WHO Regional Office for Africa. Information brochure for early detection and management of noma. 2016; http://www. who. int/ iris/handle/10665 /254579. 4. Bolivar I, Whiteson K, Stadelmann B, et al. Bacterial diversity in oral samples of children in Niger with acute noma, acute necrotizing gingivitis, and healthy controls. PLo S Negl Trop Dis 2012;6(3): e 1556. salivary incontinence.