6 A 36-Year-Old Male Traveller Returning from Botswana With a Creeping Eruption EMMA C. WALL Clinical Presentation Questions History 1. What is the likely diagnosis and what are your differentials? A 36-year-old male restaurant owner presents to a travel 2. What is the risk of this condition if untreated? clinic in Europe with a mobile itchy mass under his skin. Three weeks ago, he noted the mass in his groin for 4 days Discussion after which it subsided. He then noted an itchy, serpiginous rash tracking from his groin to his chest, which moved over A 36-year-old European presents because of a mobile migrathe course of several days and then disappeared; he then tory mass he has been noticing for the past 3 weeks. Five noted the mass reappearing on his right shoulder, at which weeks ago, he returned from a fishing trip to the Okavango point he was referred for assessment. There is no history Delta. Two of his travel companions have the same sympof fever or systemic illness. toms. Full blood count shows eosinophilia. Five weeks ago, he returned from a fishing holiday with four friends to the Okavango Delta in Botswana. He took Answer to Question 1 malaria chemoprophylaxis, slept on the boat under a mosquito net and swam in fresh river water. He ate freshwater What Is the Likely Diagnosis and What Are Your fish from the river. Differentials? He is married and denies sexual contact on the trip. Of the This patient is systemically well, with a mobile itchy mass. four friends who accompanied him, two also have the same The eosinophilia suggests a parasitic cause. The fact that complaint. Clinical Findings The patient is afebrile and organ system examination is normal. On his right upper deltoid is a firm mass with clear margins 3 8 cm in size. On further questioning this mass has recently migrated across his upper chest wall, and a serpiginous tract is visible ( no lymphadenopathy. Laboratory Results Total white cell count 8.9 109 /L (reference range: 4–10), eosinophil count 0.9 109 /L (<0.5), liver function tests, creatinine and electrolytes are normal. HIV antibodies are negative. 15 --- PAGE BREAK -- 16 two of his travel companions are experiencing similar symp- of treatment he expressed a larva from his nostril, which was toms indicates a common exposure factor. identified as Gnathostoma spinigerum. His two friends were The presentation is classic for gnathostomiasis, even also seen at the same institution and were given similar treatthough his travel history appears uncommon. Gnathosto- ment with full resolution of their symptoms. miasis is endemic in South-East Asia and Latin America, but only a few cases have been reported in Africa. It is a SUMMARY BOX food-borne zoonotic nematode infection that classically presents with a mobile subcutaneous mass, intermittent creep Gnathostomiasis ing eruptions and eosinophilia. The infection is acquired by Gnathostomiasis is mostly caused by Gnathostoma spinigerum, eating raw fish and other food items. a zoonotic nematode. Humans are accidental hosts. Gnathos Intermittent migratory swellings are also typically seen in tomiasis is endemic throughout areas where large amounts patients with Loa loa infection (calabar swelling), but Loa loa of raw or undercooked freshwater fish and crustaceans are is not endemic in the Okavango Delta and the minimum consumed, most importantly in East and South-East Asia and incubation time is 5 months. Central and South America. Case reports are emerging from Southern Africa. A very rare cause of migratory swellings and eosinophilia is Adult worms infect the gastrointestinal tract of feline and sparganosis. It is caused by larvae (‘spargana’) of canine and canine species. When eggs excreted through the faeces get into feline tapeworms of the genus Spirometra and acquired by water, first-stage larvae hatch, which then infect small freshwater drinking water containing infected copepods or by eating crustaceans. A large variety of animals can act as a second raw or undercooked intermediate hosts such as amphibians intermediate host. Humans become infected by eating raw or undercooked meat of intermediate hosts, such as freshwater fish, or reptiles. It mainly occurs in East and South-East Asia, but crabs, shrimps, frogs, snakes, fowl and pork. Gnathostomiasis cases have also been reported in East Africa. commonly occurs in outbreaks. Several other infections acquired in the tropics can be Larvae penetrate the human intestinal wall and wander around migratory and are associated with an itchy track-like rash. the body. Initial symptoms are non-specific and may include Such creeping eruptions are commonly caused by larvae of fever, malaise, vomiting and diarrhoea lasting for 2 to 3 weeks. This is accompanied by marked eosinophilia. Within 1 month animal hookworms or Strongyloides stercoralis but these precutaneous infection may develop, manifesting as non-pitting sent with fine, serpiginous tracks and not with a large mobile oedematous migratory swellings that may be pruritic or painful mass, as seen in this patient. Very rare causes of creeping and mainly affect the trunk and the proximal limbs. Visceral eruption are ectopic fascioliasis and migratory myiasis. disease occurs when the larvae migrate through the internal organs such as the lungs, gut, genitourinary tract, eye and CNS. Answer to Question 2 CNS invasion may manifest as eosinophilic meningoencephalitis, What is the Risk of This Condition If Untreated? subarachnoid haemorrhages, cranial neuritis or painful radiculomyelitis as a result of invasion of the spinal cord. Diagnosis is Deaths from gnathostomiasis have occurred when the para- suggested by eosinophilia, migratory swellings and a history of site has entered the brain or spinal cord, causing severe neu- geographical and food exposure. Gnathostomiasis is confirmed rological sequelae. when demonstration of the parasite is made microscopically, radiologically or on positive serological examination up to 3 months after presentation. Lumbar puncture and cranial The Case Continued. . . imaging may be necessary in suspected CNS disease. CSF is often xanthochromic and may show eosinophilia. Imaging may The patient admitted that on their trip they had made sushi reveal larval tracks within the brain and cord parenchyma. from fresh fish caught in the river. A clinical diagnosis of Treatment consists of albendazole 400 mg bid for 21 days and/or cutaneous gnathostomiasis was made and the patient was ivermectin 200 μg/kg on two consecutive days. For CNS infection, adjunctive corticosteroids are considered beneficial. started on albendazole 400 mg bid for 21 days and ivermectin 200 μg/kg stat. Serology for Gnathostoma was negative. Over the next 6 days, the serpiginous lesion migrated over his shoulder and neck, disappeared for 24 hours, then reap- Further Reading peared between his eyebrows, moved to his forehead and face ( Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 [ 2. Vega-Lopez F, Ritchie S. Dermatological Problems. In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 [ 3. Checkley AM, Chiodini PL, Dockrell DHm, et al. Eosinophilia in returning travellers and migrants from the tropics: UK recommendations for investigation and initial management. J Infect 2010;60(1):1–20. 4. Neumayr A (ed). Antiparasitictreatment recommendations. 2 nd Ed. Tredition: Hamburg. 2018 (cf: https://tredition. de/autoren/ andreas-neumayr-16821 /antiparasitic-treatment-recommendationspaperback-104637 /). patient’s forehead.