9 A 52-Year-Old Man from Vietnam With Evolving Shock NICK JONES AND SOPHIE YACOUB Clinical Presentation presence of hepatic impairment are important markers of disease severity, and his raised haematocrit level is suggestive of History haemoconcentration. A 52-year-old man is brought to an urban hospital in Ho Chi What are the main differential diagnoses to Minh City, Vietnam because of abdominal pain and vomitconsider? ing. He describes 4 days of retro-orbital headache, lethargy, Having presented in a high-endemicity area, the clinical picmyalgia and fevers that had begun to improve over the last ture is typical of dengue infection with apparent progression 24 hours. He has a history of type 2 diabetes mellitus and to severe disease with vascular leak and compensated shock. poorly controlled hypertension. His last travel outside the Even without an eschar, rickettsial infections, such as scrub city was several years ago. typhus, are the most important differential diagnoses. Malaria should also be considered, but there is no evidence Examination findings of haemolysis to support this, and risk of malaria is very low in most urban areas of Vietnam. Many aspects of the presen The patient is drowsy, but rousable. His Glasgow Coma tation could be compatible with leptospirosis, but the Score (GCS) is 14 /15, temperature 36.5°C, blood pressure absence of suspected rodent exposure makes this less likely. 105 /90 mm Hg, heart rate 120 bpm, respiratory rate 28 breaths per minute and peripheral oxygen saturation 93 % on air. He has a weak radial pulse, but normal heart sounds. TABLE Laboratory Results on Admission Respiratory examination reveals a dull percussion note 9.1 and reduced breath sounds at both lung bases. He has mild abdominal distension, with shifting dullness and a tender Reference Parameter Patient Range 3 cm liver edge. Skin examination is unremarkable. Haemoglobin (g/d L) 14.6 12.5–17.2 Laboratory results Haematocrit (%) 53.9 40–52 See Table 9.1. Platelets ( 109 /L) 58 160–370 WCC ( 109 /L) 2.1 3.6–10.5 Questions Neutrophils ( 109 /L) 0.9 1.5–7.7 1. What are the main differential diagnoses to consider? Lymphocytes ( 109 /L) 0.8 1.1–4.0 2. What are the priorities for management? C-reactive protein (mg/L) 20 <4 Urea (mmol/L) 7.8 2.5–7.8 Discussion Creatinine (μmol/L) 114 62–115 The short duration of symptoms before presentation is sug- Alanine aminotransferase (U/L) 812 7–40 gestive of an acute infective process, and the relatively low Alkaline phosphatase (U/L) 260 30–130 CRP and absence of neutrophil leucocytosis make a viral Total bilirubin (μmol/L) 18 0–20 aetiology likely. Clinical signs of shock are present: tachycardia, narrow pulse pressure (<20 mm Hg), reduced GCS and Lactate (mmol/L) 3.5 0.6–1.4 raised serum lactate. The degree of thrombocytopenia and 22 --- PAGE BREAK -- Another differential diagnosis to consider in a diabetic from progress to severe disease with organ impairment, bleeding, South East Asia with possible sepsis is melioidosis. capillary leakage and distributive shock. Severe disease usually progresses through three phases: a febrile phase of 2 to 7 days’ What are the priorities for management? duration, characterized by high fever, headache, myalgia, thrombocytopenia and leukopenia; a critical phase with high risk With a diagnosis of severe dengue highly likely, supportive of capillary leak, shock and occasionally bleeding at the point of management of the patient’s cardiovascular and respiratory defervescence; and a recovery phase, in which clinical systems should be prioritized. This involves careful fluid improvement is accompanied by extravascular fluid resorption resuscitation, with thorough and frequent assessment for evi- and organ recovery. dence of fluid overload. Ultrasound scans should be under- Dengue diagnosis is confirmed in the first 4 to 6 days of illness by detection of the NS 1 antigen by RDTs or ELISA or detection taken to ascertain the extent of pleural effusions and ascites; of viral RNA using RT-PCR, after which the sensitivity of these and if available, an echocardiogram could be considered to methods declines because of the short viraemia in peripheral assess myocardial contractility and intravascular volume. blood. Paired serology tests for Ig M/Ig G can also be performed, (at least 3 days apart) demonstrating seroconversion; however, The case continued… cross-reaction with other flaviviruses remains a problem, especially in Zika endemic areas. Warning signs for severe disease include abdominal pain or The patient is diagnosed with compensated shock and is tenderness, persistent vomiting, fluid accumulation, mucosal admitted to a high-dependency unit for close observation bleeding, lethargy or restlessness, hepatomegaly, and increasand supportive care. Ultrasound scans confirm the presence ing haematocrit with concurrent worsening of thrombocytopeof moderate bilateral pleural effusions and ascites, as well as nia, six of which were present in this case. With no antiviral treatment available, cautious intravascular volume replacement mild hepatomegaly and a thickened gallbladder wall. He is and supportive treatment are the mainstays of management, infused with Ringer’s lactate solution at a volume of accompanied by careful monitoring for signs of fluid overload. In 10 m L/kg over 1 hour before his fluid status is reassessed. many countries the epidemiology of dengue is changing in line He remains tachycardic and oliguric with a haematocrit rise with aging populations. Older patients often present with atypical to 55.1 %, therefore the rate of fluid therapy is increased to features and have higher risk of complications and death as a result of difficulties in controlling haemodynamic status in the 15 m L/kg/hr until sufficient haemodynamic improvement is context of high-level comorbidity. Uncontrolled hypertension shown. The rate of fluid delivery is subsequently reduced to and diabetes, as in this case, have been shown to be risk factors 7 m L/kg/hr for 2 hours and by a further 2 m L/kg/hr every for poor outcomes. Promising attempts at vaccine deployment 2 hours until no longer required. Repeat clinical assessments have been thwarted by the fact that re-infection of immuneare undertaken at two-hourly intervals throughout, with hae- primed individuals is associated with greater risk of severe disease; therefore the searches for effective therapeutics and a matocrit checks every 6 hours. The patient is discharged pan-specific dengue vaccine continue. from hospital 3 days later, after complete recovery. Reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR) and a positive NS 1 ELISA confirm dengue diagnosis. Further reading SUMMARY BOX 1. Yacoub S, Farra J. Dengue. In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical Dengue Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2014 [ Dengue is the commonest arthropod-borne virus to infect 2. Bhatt S, Gething P, Brady O, et al. The global distribution and burhumans, with an estimated annual incidence of 390 million den of dengue. Nature 2013;496(7446):504–7. infections worldwide. The virus is a member of the flavivirus 3. World Health Organisation. Dengue and severe dengue fact sheet. family and has four closely related, but antigenically distinct WHO. int. April 2019. serotypes. Transmission to humans is through Aedes mosqui 4. Lin R, Lee T, Leo Y. Dengue in the elderly: a review. Expert Rev toes; predominantly the daytime-biting Aedes aegypti. Aedes albopictus is a secondary vector in Asia, and its ability to survive Anti Infect Ther 2017;15(8) 729–5. temperate climates has allowed spread to many countries in 5. Diamond MS, Pierson TC. Molecular insight into Dengue virus Europe and North America. Although most clinically apparent pathogenesis and its implications for disease control. Cell infections result in a self-limiting febrile illness, a minority 2015;162(3):488–2.