10 A 55-Year-Old Indigenous Woman from Australia With a Widespread Exfoliating Rash and Sepsis BART J. CURRIE AND JAMES MCCARTHY Clinical Presentation Discussion History A 55-year-old indigenous Australian woman has a widespread exfoliating rash and is clearly systemically unwell with You are working in a remote indigenous community in tropsigns of sepsis. ical northern Australia, and the community health worker asks you to visit a house to assess an elderly woman who Answer to Question 1 has been living in the crowded back room. Her family are worried that she has become increasingly withdrawn and What is Your Provisional Diagnosis? hasn’t been getting out of the house much at all. The exfoliating rash is classical for crusted scabies, which is uncommon but well recognized in remote indigenous communities where scabies remains endemic. Undiagnosed cases Clinical Findings can be ‘core transmitters’ of scabies; and in this case many household members, and in particular the children, had mul The patient is a 55-year-old indigenous Australian woman tiple scabies lesions, some with secondary pyoderma. In addiwith a widespread exfoliative rash involving all limbs and tion, this woman has secondary sepsis which is likely to be especially the armpits, buttocks and thighs ( from Staphylococcus aureus or Streptococcus pyogenes bacteraeflakes of skin cover the mattress she is lying on. In addition, mia, with inoculation through her skin fissures. However, she has fissures over her wrists and knees. She also looks pale, is clammy and poorly responsive. Her temperature is 39.5°C Gram-negative or polymicrobial sepsis is also occasionally (103.1°F), heart rate 110 bpm, respiratory rate 28 breath seen in patients with crusted scabies. cycles per minute and blood pressure 85 mm Hg systolic to radial pulsation. Oxygen saturation by pulse oximetry is 92 % on room air. Laboratory Results You take blood cultures, full blood count, CRP and biochemistry. Samples are sent into the regional laboratory, with results expected the next day. You also take skin scrapings, which you can look at yourself using the community clinic microscope. Questions 1. What is your provisional diagnosis? 2. What is your initial management? 24 --- PAGE BREAK -- Answer to Question 2 The household clothes, linen and furniture were put out What is Your Initial Management? in the sun for a day, and the rooms were treated with a commercial residual insecticide. The woman returned to the She is transported to the community health centre where you community after 3 weeks in the hospital, with her skin showput her on oxygen, insert a wide-bore cannula, take an addiing no residual hyperkeratosis or shedding. She and the famtional set of blood cultures, give her 1 litre of normal saline ily are followed up regularly by the health staff to allow early over 30 minutes and commence her on intravenous (IV) cefdiagnosis and treatment should she again be infected with triaxone 2 g and gentamicin 320 mg (her weight is 62 kg). scabies. The Case Continued… SUMMARY BOX After the IV fluids, her blood pressure rose to 95 mm Hg systolic and her oxygen saturation was 97 % with oxygen Crusted Scabies by nasal prongs. She was evacuated to the regional hospital. Although Sarcoptes scabiei infection and mite reproduction is In the clinic, microscopy of her skin scrapings under low- usually self-limiting, hyperinfestation can develop in susceptible power magnification confirmed the diagnosis, showing individuals. Crusted or Norwegian scabies was first described in patients with leprosy in Norway. Crusted scabies can occur multiple scabies mites of varying maturity and multiple eggs. after immunosuppressive therapy in transplantation, rheuma In the hospital, the patient was managed in a single room tological conditions, chemotherapy for malignancy and in with enhanced contact precautions to prevent transmission infection with HIV and HTLV-1. It can also occur in malnutrition, of scabies to staff and visitors. Down’s syndrome and in the elderly and institutionalized, Treatment consisted of a five-dose course of ivermectin especially those with physical or cognitive disability who are (200 μg/kg/dose) on days 0, 1, 7, 8 and 14, together with a unable to scratch. Patients with crusted scabies can have many thousands of mites in skin lesions and can serve as ‘core topical scabicide (benzyl benzoate 25 %) applied every second transmitters’ for continuing outbreaks of scabies in communities day for the first week; then twice weekly for the second week, and nursing homes. Mites from crusted scabies cases are with a keratolytic cream (lactic acid and urea in sorbolene not genetically distinct, with ordinary scabies occurring in those cream) after bathing on the days the topical scabicide was infected from these cases. Crusted scabies results from unfettered mite reproduction not administered. Her blood cultures taken in the community and host reaction, resulting in formation of hyperkeratotic skin grew S. aureus resistant to flucloxacillin and clindamycin, but crusts that may be loose and flaky or thick and adherent. Skin sensitive to gentamicin, co-trimoxazole and doxycycline flakes with thousands of mites can be shed onto bed linen and (i. e. community-acquired MRSA). She was therefore given floors. Although hands and feet are most commonly involved, the 2 weeks of IV vancomycin. A transthoracic echocardiogram distribution is often extensive, including neck, face and scalp as well as axillae, trunk, buttocks and limbs, especially knees and showed no features of endocarditis. Repeated blood cultures elbows. Thick deposits of debris with mites accumulate beneath 48 hours after admission were negative, and by that stage the nails, which are often thickened and dystrophic. Crusting can she was afebrile, off oxygen and eating well. While she was be limited to one or two limbs, hands or fingers. Unlike ordinary in the hospital, all her family members were treated in the scabies, where itching is usually intense, the presence of itch is community with topical permethrin 5 %, given as two doses variable in crusted scabies. Fissuring and secondary bacterial infection are common ( 1 week apart, and the children with skin sores were each is common but not always present, and serum Ig E levels are often given a single dose of intramuscular benzathine penicillin, extremely high. There is high mortality in crusted scabies cases with excellent response. from secondary bacterial sepsis, including with Gram-negative organisms such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa in addition to S. pyogenes and/or S. aureus. The differential diagnoses of crusted scabies include psoriasis, extensive tinea corporis, skin malignancies such as the T-cell lymphomas mycosis fungoides and the Se zary syndrome, nutritional deficiencies such as pellagra, pemphigus, kava dermopathy, onchocerciasis, lepromatous leprosy and secondary syphilis. Further Reading 1. Currie BJ, Mc Carthy JS. Scabies. In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 [ 2. Currie BJ, Mc Carthy JS. Permethrin and ivermectin for scabies. N Engl J Med 2010;362(8):717–25. 3. Roberts LJ, Huffam SE, Walton SF, et al. Crusted scabies: clinical and immunological findings in seventy-eight patients and a review scabies.