11 A 45-Year-Old Male Security Guard from Malawi With Difficulties in Walking and Back Pain JURI KATCHANOV Clinical Presentation diarrhoea and he is continent for stool and urine. There is no history of trauma or past tuberculosis (TB). He has never History been tested for HIV. He is a non-smoker, but drinks two paper cartons (about A 45-year-old security guard from Malawi is admitted to a one litre) of Chibuku, a locally brewed beer, per day. He is local tertiary hospital because of back pain and progressive married with three children, who are all well. He resides in an difficulty in walking. urban area and used to work as a security guard but has been His troubles started 1 year earlier with back pain and he unemployed for the last 6 months because of his illness. presented to a local health centre. He was given paracetamol and sent home. The pain did not improve. Over the following weeks he also developed difficulty in walking and ‘pins Clinical Findings and needles’ sensation in his legs. He looks well and is afebrile with normal vital signs. There is Three months after the first visit he presented again to the tenderness over the lower thoracic spine and severe spasticity same health centre. His temperature was slightly elevated (37.5°C, 99.5°F). He was given antimalarials, a single dose of both legs ( muscle flicker). Deep tendon reflexes of the lower limbs are of praziquantel and paracetamol. He consulted a local tradiexaggerated. The plantar reflexes are upgoing. There is a sentional healer who applied tattoos to his chest and his back sory level for pain and temperature sensation between T 9 ( and T 11, with diminished joint sense in his big toes bilaterther deteriorated and he finally became bedridden. ally. The examination of his cranial nerves and the upper The patient denies fever, night sweats and weight loss, and limbs is normal. there is no chronic cough. There is neither haematuria nor from a traditional healer on the chest of the patient. (B) Severe spasticity and contractures of both lower limbs. 26 --- PAGE BREAK -- Laboratory Results Important Causes of Spinal Cord Disease TABLE in the Tropics and Their Typical Clinical 11.1 His Full blood count results are normal. Features Typical Onset Clinical Questions and Course Features 1. What is the neuroanatomical syndrome and what is your Spinal tuberculosis Insidious onset, Spasticity differential diagnosis? chronically common, progressive over bladder may be 2. What further management should be carried out? weeks, with spared, spinal months of back deformity on Discussion pain examination Spinal metastases Subacute onset, Spasticity or A 45-year-old Malawian man presents with chronic back chronically flaccidity, pain and slowly progressive spastic paraparesis. On examina- progressive over bladder may be tion there is tenderness over the lower thoracic spine and a weeks spared thoracic sensory level. He denies any constitutional symp Transverse myelitis Acute onset, often Bladder toms. His past medical history is unremarkable. His HIV sta- (incl. autoimmune) non-progressive involvement tus is unknown. common Schistosomiasis Acute (days) or Often flaccid Answer to Question 1 subacute (a couple paresis, of weeks) bladder What is the Neuroanatomical Syndrome and What involvement is Your Differential Diagnosis? common The clinical signs – spastic paraparesis with hyperreflexia, upgoing plantar reflexes and thoracic sensory level – localize the lesion to the spinal cord. The bladder is usually involved in spinal cord disease, but the absence of bladder symptoms Diagnostic Clues and Possible Treatment does not rule out spinal cord involvement, particularly in TABLE Regimens for Important Causes of Spinal slowly progressive lesions, as in our case. 11.2 Cord Disease in Resource-Limited Settings Spinal cord disease can be traumatic or non-traumatic. Nothing in the patient’s history suggests trauma. Non- Diagnostic traumatic spinal cord disease can be compressive or Clues Treatment non-compressive. Compressive disease is sometimes amena Spinal tuberculosis Typical spinal Antituberculous ble to spinal surgery. radiograph (see treatment Common causes of adult non-traumatic compressive spi- Box) Spinal surgery if nal cord disease in sub-Saharan Africa are spinal TB (‘Pott’s Epidemiological available and disease’), spinal metastases and degenerative spinal disease evidence applicable (see Box) including slipped disc. Common causes of non-compressive spinal cord disease are schistosomiasis, autoimmune trans- Spinal metastases Clinical evidence Very limited of the primary options: verse myelitis and HIV-associated vacuolar myelopathy. tumour (e. g. radiotherapy Answer to Question 2 prostate, breast) rarely available; corticosteroids What is the Further Management? to decrease The diagnosis of spinal cord disease in resource-limited set- oedema tings is often clinical (Table 11.1). Management should Transverse myelitis Young adults Corticosteroids focus on diagnosis and treatment of the underlying aetiology (incl. autoimmune) Inflammatory CSF and on prevention and treatment of the complications of spi- Schistosomiasis Exposure to Praziquantel, nal cord disease. Diagnostic clues and possible treatment reg- freshwater in corticosteroids imens are summarized in Table 11.2. endemic regions, All patients should be tested for HIV, ova of Schistosoma young adults in endemic coutries spp. in urine and stool and evidence of TB or neoplasia on or non-immune chest- and spinal radiography. If available, ultrasound exam- travellers; CSF ination of the abdomen is very valuable in tumour-screening eosinophilia; other and TB work-up. CSF should be examined, which is of par- manifestations of schistosomiasis ticular importance in immunosuppressed patients. may or may not be Realistically, most patients admitted to hospital with present. paraplegia because of spinal cord disease will leave the --- PAGE BREAK -- 28 Common Complications of Spinal Cord TABLE Disease and Their Prevention and 11.3 Management Complication Prevention/Management Pressure sores Nursing, training and counselling of guardians (two hourly turning) Urinary Catheterization retention Contractures Physiotherapy, training of guardians for home-based physiotherapy Pain Pain relief by NSAID/opiates, involvement of local palliative care team Immobilization If available, prescription of walking aids/ wheelchairs Depression Spiritual and mental support, occupational therapy/community projects, pharmacotherapy, involvement of local palliative care team mass in the lower dorsal region with collapse of the T 11 vertebral body. (Waldman, S. D., Campbell, R. S. D., 2011. Imaging of Pain, 1 st ed. Saunders, Amsterdam. pp. 147–8) hospital paraplegic. The prognosis is overall poor, and often the secondary complications rather than the primary patholregularly and was still waiting for a wheelchair. He did not ogy dictate the further course of the disease. The prevention attend the neurosurgical outpatient clinic because of probof complications of spinal cord disease is therefore of paralems with transportation. mount importance. Health workers should work hand in hand with guardians, physiotherapists and the local palliative SUMMARY BOX care team (Table 11.3). Spinal Tuberculosis (Pott’s Disease) The Case Continued… Spinal TB is a collective term for spinal involvement in Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection. It comprises tuberculous The patient was found to be HIV-positive. His urine dipstick spondylitis, tuberculous spondylodiscitis and tuberculous was normal and there were no ova of Schistosoma spp. epidural and paraspinal abscess. Often, all manifestations occur detected in his urine and stool. The spinal radiograph together. Spinal TB is the most common cause of tuberculous showed a collapse of T 11 vertebral body as well as soft tissue paraplegia and represents two-thirds of cases. Other causes are swelling around the spine ( abdominal ultrasound examination were normal. myelitis and intramedullary tuberculoma. A presumed diagnosis of spinal TB was made and the Constitutional symptoms are absent in more than half of patient was started on standard first-line antituberculous patients, and simultaneous active pulmonary involvement is rather the exception than the rule. Inflammatory markers (ESR treatment. Vitamin B was prescribed to prevent peripheral 6 and CRP) are elevated in most cases and may be used as a neuropathy. Physiotherapy and intensive guardian counselscreening method for patients from endemic regions presenting ling were initiated at the hospital. The patient was reviewed with back pain. Spinal radiographs may typically show focal areas by a spinal surgeon who did not recommend surgical inter- of erosions and osseous destruction in the anterior corners of the vention at that time, but suggested a review 3 months later. vertebral bodies, involvement of the adjacent disc or vertebral body, ‘wedging,’ gibbus deformity or paraspinal abscess The patient was discharged home. The hospital palliative formation. care team was involved and put him on their list for monthly Compressive spinal cord involvement is a common and most home visits. feared complication caused by accumulation of epidural caseous At 4 weeks he was followed up in the HIV outpatient debris or by vertebral collapse or dislocation. clinic. His neurological deficits were unchanged. His CD 4 CT-guided percutaneous vertebral or paravertebral biopsy count was 331 cells/μL and he was started on antiretroviral and aspiration is the diagnostic gold standard. If biopsy is available, polymerase chain reaction (PCR)–based technology therapy. such as Gene Xpert might expedite the diagnostic process and At the 3-month follow-up by the palliative care team, the allow the early recognition of antibiotic resistance. patient reported some subjective improvement in his gait. Antituberculous therapy is the same as for pulmonary TB; Clinically though, his deficits remained unchanged. He however, most national guidelines and centres recommend longer treatment for nine instead of 6 months. was taking his antituberculous and antiretroviral medication --- PAGE BREAK -- Further Reading Progression of bone destruction may continue for up to 1 year after effective antituberculous treatment has been initiated and should not be taken as a sign of treatment failure. Adjunctive 1. Heckmann JE, Bhigjee AI. Tropical neurology. In: Farrar J, editor. corticosteroid treatment is not recommended for spinal TB. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 However, some centres use steroids in severe spinal cord [ compression to reduce oedematous swelling, which is a non- 2. Thwaites G. Tuberculosis. In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical evidence-based approach. Surgery has been recommended for Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 [ patients with (1) extensive extradural compression with features of 3. Draulans N, Kiekens C, Roels E, et al. Etiology of spinal cord injuspinal cord involvement, (2) no improvement or worsening of ries in sub-Saharan Africa. Spinal Cord 2011;49:1148–54. deficits after conservative treatment and (3) potentially unstable 4. Jain AK. Tuberculosis of the spine: a fresh look at an old disease. spine or kyphosis of more than 60 degrees. Surgical treatment J Bone Joint Surg Br 2010;92:905–13. relieves compression of the spinal cord, corrects kyphosis, may 5. Dunn RN, Ben Husien M. Spinal tuberculosis: review of current facilitate fusion and lead to faster pain relief. management. Bone Joint J 2018;100-B (4):425–31.