12 A 29-Year-Old Man from The Gambia With Genital Ulceration DAVID C. W. MABEY Clinical Presentation Discussion History A 29-year-old Gambian man presents with genital ulcers which he has developed over the past week. He admits to A 29-year-old man comes to your clinic in The Gambia comhaving had unprotected sex with a commercial sex worker plaining of painful sores involving his private parts for 7 days. 2 weeks previously. He has been previously well. He admits to having had sex with a commercial sex worker 2 weeks ago, when he had not used a condom. Answer to Question 1 What Are the Most Important Differential Clinical Findings Diagnoses? He is in considerable pain and is only able to walk with dif- The three major causes of genital ulceration are Herpes simficulty because of these sores. He is afebrile and well nour- plex, syphilis and chancroid. Ulcers caused by H. simplex are self-limiting in immunocompetent individuals, and do not ished. General examination is unremarkable. The only usually last longer than a few days. They can be severe and abnormality is the presence of numerous painful ulcers on persistent in the immunocompromised. Ulcers caused by his penis, scrotum and inner thigh ( primary syphilis are usually painless, and it is unusual for are tender, soft and bleed on contact. There is no inguinal there to be more than a single ulcer. Inguinal adenopathy lymphadenopathy. is sometimes seen but is usually painless. Ulcers caused by chancroid are often multiple, and usually painful. In some Questions 50 % of cases painful inguinal lymphadenopathy is found. Inguinal buboes may be fluctuant and sometimes rupture, 1. What are the most important differential diagnoses? releasing large amounts of pus. 2. How would you manage this patient? However, the clinical diagnosis of genital ulcer disease is unreliable. For this reason, the patient should be treated syndromically for both syphilis and chancroid. If he is HIVpositive, additional treatment for herpes should also be considered. Answer to Question 2 How Would You Manage This Patient? Treat him for syphilis with a single dose of IM benzathine penicillin 2.4 million units. Treat him for chancroid with a single dose of azithromycin 1 g PO or ciprofloxacin 500 mg bid for 3 days or erythromycin 500 mg qds for 7 days. If he is HIV-positive, consider adding aciclovir 400 mg tds for 7 days. He is at high risk of HIV because he has acquired a genital ulcer from a commercial sex worker, so you should test him for HIV and start antiretroviral treatment if positive. Serol thigh. The ulcers are soft, tender and bleed on contact. ogy for syphilis will be helpful in guiding treatment for his 30 --- PAGE BREAK -- sexual partners, but he should be treated for syphilis even if it SUMMARY BOX is negative, because serology can be negative in early primary syphilis. He should be strongly encouraged to bring his sex- Chancroid ual partners to the clinic for assessment and treatment. Chancroid is a disease of core groups, principally sex workers and their clients. Unlike other STIs, asymptomatic infection is rare; The Case Continued… most infected individuals have painful genital ulcers. Laboratory diagnosis of chancroid is difficult. It depends on the identification of the causative agent, H. ducreyi, in material The patient was treated with 2.4 million units of benzathine from lesions. Gram stain is neither sensitive nor specific. Nucleic penicillin IM stat and given erythromycin 500 mg to take qds acid amplification tests such as PCR have been used in research for 7 days. He was HIV-negative, his syphilis serology was settings, but are not commercially available. Isolation is the gold positive (RPR and TPHA). A swab was taken for culture standard. H. ducreyi is a fastidious organism, requiring an of Haemophilus ducreyi, and H. ducreyi was grown after three enriched culture medium that needs to be made selective by the days’ incubation at 33°C. Mixed infection are common in addition of antibiotics to inhibit the growth of other organisms present in the ulcer. Unlike most bacteria, it grows best at 33°C. patients with sexually transmitted diseases (STIs), since for Virtually all strains of H. ducreyi are resistant to penicillin, behavioural reasons patients with one STI are at increased because of plasmids encoding various penicillin resistance genes. risk of others. The patient returned for follow-up after 7 days. Most strains are also resistant to tetracyclines and sulphona The pain had resolved and the ulcers were all healing mides. Treatment for chancroid is with azithromycin 1 g PO or ciprofloxacin 500 mg bid for 3 days or erythromycin 500 mg qds ( for 7 days. It is important to treat all patients with genital ulcers for chancroid in regions where it is endemic (believed to be most parts of Africa, Asia and perhaps South America). Because it is difficult to diagnose, the incidence, prevalence and geographical distribution of chancroid are not well known; but it is thought to have become less common since the onset of the HIV/AIDS epidemic. Further Reading 1. Richens J, Mayaud P, Mabey DCW. Sexually transmitted infections (excluding HIV). In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed London: Elsevier; 2014 [ 2. Mayaud P, Ndowa FJ, Richens J, et al. Sexually transmitted infections. In: Mabey D, et al, editors. Principles of Medicine in Africa. 4 th ed Cambridge University Press, 2014 [ 3. Lewis DA, Ison CA. Chancroid. Sex Transm Infect 2006;82 healing and the pain has resolved. 4. Kemp M, Christensen JJ, Lautenschlager S, et al. European guideline for the management of chancroid, 2011. Int J STD AIDS 2011;22(5):241–4. 5. Kularatne RS, Muller EE, Maseko DV, et al. Trends in the relative prevalence of genital ulcer disease pathogens and association with HIV infection in Johannesburg, South Africa, 2007-2015. PLo S One 2018;13:e 0194125. https://doi. org/10.1371 /journal. pone.0194125.