13 A 16-Year-Old Girl from Malawi With Fever and Abdominal Pain CAMILLA ROTHE Clinical Presentation Discussion History A 16-year-old girl presents with fever, abdominal pain and frontal headache. She has recently delivered a baby, other A 16-year-old Malawian girl presents to the emergency room wise her past medical history is unremarkable. of a local hospital because of fever, generalized abdominal She is febrile, mildly jaundiced and there is diffuse pain and frontal headache for the past 5 days. abdominal tenderness with slight splenomegaly. There is She delivered a baby 5 months ago. An HIV test done in mild normocytic anaemia. Malaria parasites are positive with the antenatal clinic was negative. Her further past medical low parasitaemia. history is unremarkable. She lives with her parents, her three siblings and her baby Answer to Question 1 in an urban high-density area. There is no running water and no electricity in the house. The family fetch water from a What Are Your Most Important Differential community tap. The girl went to primary school but recently Diagnoses? dropped out during her pregnancy. Malaria could explain most of her signs and symptoms, even though her abdominal pain would be unusual. However, in a malaria-endemic area where large parts of the population are Clinical Findings semi-immune, low parasitaemia is common and often subclinical. Nevertheless, malaria itself, particularly if combined 16-year-old girl in a fair nutritional state. Temperature 38.1°C (100.6°F), blood pressure 110 /60 mm Hg, pulse with severe anaemia, is a predisposing factor for Gram 78 bpm, respiratory rate 20 breath cycles per minute, Glas- negative bacteraemia and sepsis. Enteric fever (typhoid or paratyphoid) is another diagnogow Coma Scale 15 /15. There is mild scleral jaundice, no sis to consider, particularly given her abdominal tenderness, neck stiffness. The examination of the abdomen shows difher splenomegaly, her frontal headache and her relative brafuse tenderness but no guarding. The liver is not enlarged, dycardia. Mild jaundice in enteric fever may be caused by the spleen is palpable at 2 cm below the left costal margin. hepatitis, cholangitis, cholecystitis or haemolysis. The chest is clear and there is no lymphadenopathy. Pelvic examination is unremarkable and there is no vaginal discharge. TABLE Laboratory Results on Admission Investigations 13.1 Parameter Patient Reference Her laboratory results on admission are shown in Table 13.1. The blood film for malaria parasites is positive, parasitaemia WBC ( 109 /L) 3.2 4–10 is described as “low”. Liver function tests are not available Haemoglobin (mg/d L) 10.9 12–14 because reagents are out of stock. MCV (f L) 90 80–99 Questions Platelets ( 109 /L) 164 150–400 Creatinine (μmol/L) 71 <80 What are your most important differential diagnoses? How would you approach this patient? 32 --- PAGE BREAK -- In HIV-positive patients an infection with invasive non The incubation period of typhoid fever averages 10 to 20 days typhoidal salmonellae (i NTS) should be considered. (range 3–56). It is shorter in paratyphoid (1–10 days). Symptoms are nonspecific with fever, headache, dry cough and abdominal pain. Other than in malaria, fever starts insidiously Answer to Question 2 and may go unnoticed by the patient for some time. Temperature How Would You Approach This Patient? typically rises in the evening hours and patients may be afebrile in the morning. Constipation is common, but foul-smelling diarrhoea Blood cultures should be taken in any febrile patient regard- may occur during the course of an untreated infection. Patients less of the malaria test result to rule out bacterial sepsis and may become confused and apathetic and, if untreated, may die of enteric fever. Her HIV test should be repeated. myocarditis, overwhelming toxaemia, intestinal perforation or haemorrhage. Since she is symptomatic and has malaria parasites in her Full blood count typically shows leukopenia. Low-grade blood, she should receive antimalarials according to the anaemia and thrombocytopenia as well as slightly elevated national guidelines and the local resistance profile. She transaminases are also common, but non-specific. should also be given broad-spectrum antibiotics to cover The definitive diagnosis of typhoid requires proof of S. Typhi in for Gram-negative and, less likely, Gram-positive bacteria. blood cultures or bone marrow. Isolation from stool or urine indicates carrier state but does not prove disease. The serological A urinary dipstick could quickly help rule out a urinary tract Widal test lacks both sensitivity and specificity and should be infection. abandoned altogether. Novel and more promising serological An abdominal ultrasound should be done to rule out post- tests are under development. Meanwhile, blood culture remains hepatic causes of jaundice and to assess texture and size of the diagnostic gold standard. In many low-resource settings, liver and spleen. blood culture testing is however unavailable. Patients with suspected enteric fever should be started on empirical antibiotic therapy. Antibiotic resistance patterns vary The Case Continued… considerably between endemic areas. In many countries, antibiotic resistance is on the rise. Fluoroquinolones are the drugs of On admission the patient was started on artemether/lume- choice in areas without antimicrobial resistance because they fantrine PO and a broad-spectrum antibiotic (ceftriaxone reach very high intracellular concentrations. Third-generation cephalosporins or azithromycin should be used in South Asia 2 g IV od). A repeat HIV test was negative. Blood cultures where fluoroquinolone resistance is common. grew Salmonella Typhi. The antibiotic therapy was switched Duration of treatment is between 1 and 2 weeks depending on to ciprofloxacin 500 mg bid. On day 5 of antibiotic treat- the drug used. Case fatality rate on antibiotic treatment is <1 %. ment the patient’s fever started to settle and she was feeling Apart from public health measures to improve safe water better. She was discharged on day 7. Ciprofloxacin was con- supply and sanitation, targeted vaccination of high-risk populations seems to be a promising strategy to control typhoid fever. tinued for a total of 10 days. The patient was also given one Typhoid conjugate vaccines which can also be applied to children dose of praziquantel, because co-infection with schistosomi- <2 years of age seem to be promising. asis seems to favour chronic carriage of S. Typhi and relapse, and Malawi is a country highly endemic for schistosomiasis. Further Reading SUMMARY BOX 1. Feasey NA, Gordon MA. Salmonella Infections. In: Farrar J, editor. Typhoid Fever Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 [ Typhoid fever caused by Salmonella Typhi is an exclusively 2. Wain J, Hendriksen R, Mikoleit ML, et al. Typhoid fever. Lancet human disease and there is no animal reservoir. Typhoid is clinically indistinguishable from paratyphoid, caused by S. Paratyphi 2015;385:1136–1145. 3. Crump JA, Heydermann RS. A perspective on Invasive Salmonella A, B and C. The enteric fevers, typhoid and paratyphoid, are endemic all Disease in Africa. Clin Infect Dis 2015;61(Suppl 4):S 235–S 239. over the tropical world. Incidence appears to be highest on the 4. Hsiao A, Toy T, Seo HJ, et al. Interaction between Salmonella and Indian subcontinent (approx. 500:100 000 per year in urban Schistosomiasis: a Review. Pl OS Pathog 2016;12(12):e 1005928. slums). 5. Andrews JR, Baker S, Marks F, et al. Typhoid conjugate vaccines: a In endemic countries, enteric fevers are most common in new tool in the fight against antimicrobial resistance. Lancet Infect children and adolescents, whereas adults have acquired immunity Dis 2019;19:e 26–e 30. through previous exposures. Typhoid is usually acquired through ingestion of food or water contaminated by faeces of a patient or carrier. Overcrowding and poor sanitation are major risk factors.