14 A 22-Year-Old Woman from Bangladesh With Profuse Watery Diarrhoea GAGANDEEP KANG AND SUDHIR BABJI Clinical Presentation TABLE Laboratory Results on Admission 14.1 History Parameter Patient Reference Range A 22-year-old woman from Ashulia near Dhaka, Bangladesh is brought to a local hospital with a history of passing 12 to 15 Sodium 143.8 mmol/L (135-145 mmol/L large-volume stools in the past day. The stools resemble diluted Potassium 3.0 mmol/L (3.5-5.0 mmol/L) milk or rice water with white flakes. Her husband reports that Chloride 103.8 mmol/L (98-108 mmol/L) she became unresponsive about an hour previously and he hired Bicarbonate 11.4 mmol/L (23-28 mmol/L) a rickshaw to bring her to the hospital. He says that she had not complained of pain and did not have fever. Lactic acid (venous) 4.1 mmol/L (0.67-1.8 mmol/L) The patient has recently attended a religious festival, Creatine 203 μmol/L (62-115 μmol/L) where water was supplied in large metal containers. Her hus Blood Urea Nitrogen 8.6 mmol/L (2.9-7.1 mmol/L) band reports that there were five or six people who had attended the same event and were also ill with diarrhoea. Clinical Findings A thin young woman, who is stuporous and responds minimally to a painful stimulus (GCS 9 /15). She is afebrile, with sunken eyes, dry mouth and a scaphoid abdomen. A skin pinch returns very slowly. Her pulse rate is 110 bpm, low volume, and her blood pressure is 90 /50 mm Hg. The remainder of her systemic examination is normal. Laboratory Results Laboratory results are given in Table 14.1 Stool Examination golden-yellow colonies on thiosulphate citrate bile salt sucrose (TCBS) agar. Macroscopic: Liquid stool, rice-water appearance with no faecal matter. Hanging drop preparation shows small slender Questions curved bacilli with darting motility. Motility is completely inhibited by using Vibrio cholerae antiserum O 1. Stool cul- 1. How was the infection most likely acquired? Is there ture grows V. cholerae ( as V. cholerae O 1, Serotype Ogawa, biotype El Tor. 2. How is dehydration assessed and managed? 34 --- PAGE BREAK -- Discussion An outbreak is defined as the occurrence of disease episodes in greater numbers than would be expected at a partic A 22-year-old Bengali woman who has recently visited a reli- ular time and place. gious festival is brought into hospital in a stuporous condi- In this case there seems to be a typical cholera outbreak. tion with a history of rapid onset of severe, acute watery The source is most probably contaminated water consumed diarrhoea. There is no fever, vomiting or abdominal pain. from the containers during the festival, with the likelihood She is severely dehydrated and her electrolytes are deranged. that unless control measures for disease prevention The microscopic examination of her stool indicates cholera and appropriate case management are instituted rapidly, which is confirmed on culture. A number of other people there will be spread, significant morbidity and, possibly, who attended the same festival have also fallen ill with mortality. diarrhoea. Answer to Question 2 Answer to Question 1 How is Dehydration Assessed and Managed? How Was the Infection Most Likely Acquired? Is The WHO has recommended an assessment based on the There an Outbreak? general clinical condition of the patient (Table 14.2). Cholera transmission is closely linked to inadequate environ- Depending on their degree of fluid depletion, patients are mental management. Typical at-risk areas include peri-urban assigned to rehydration at home, supervised oral rehydration slums where basic infrastructure is not available and rural and or intravenous rehydration (Table 14.3). urban areas in endemic countries where sanitation is limited, Adequate fluid and electrolyte replacement are the cornerincluding refugee camps. Additionally, natural disasters, as stones of cholera management and differ substantially from well as times of political and social unrest associated with a the approaches to patients with gastroenteritis of other aeticollapse of infrastructure, pose a risk of cholera. ologies. Patients with severe cholera present with a higher TABLE Clinical Assessment of Dehydration in Patients with Suspected Cholera (After Harris J. B., et al.) 14.2 No Dehydration (<5 %) Some Dehydration (5–10 %) Severe Dehydration (>10 %) General Appearance Well, alert Restless, irritable Lethargic or unconscious Eyes Normal Sunken Sunken Thirst Drinks normally Thirsty, drinks eagerly Drinks poorly or is unable to drink Skin Turgor Instantaneous recoil Non-instantaneous recoil Very slow recoil (>2 s) Pulse Normal Rapid, low volume Weak or absent TABLE Approach to Rehydration in Patients with Cholera Depending on the Degree of Clinical Dehydration 14.3 (After Harris J. B., et al.) No Dehydration (<5 %) Some Dehydration (5–10 %) Severe Dehydration (>10 %) Requirement for Fluid Ongoing losses only 75 m L/kg in the first 24 hours in >100 m L/kg in the first 24 hours in Replacement addition to ongoing losses addition to ongoing losses Preferred Route of Oral Oral or intravenous Intravenous Administration Timing Usually guided by thirst Replace fluids over 3–4 hours As rapidly as possible until circulation is restored, then complete the remainder of fluids within 3 hours Monitoring Observe until ongoing losses Observe every 1–2 hours until all Once circulation is established monitor can definitely be adequately signs of dehydration resolve and every 1–2 hours replaced by ORS patient urinates ORS ¼ oral rehydration solution. --- PAGE BREAK -- 36 degree of initial dehydration, have more rapid continuing asymptomatic carriage is possible. The main source of translosses and proportionately greater electrolyte depletion than mission is from a contaminated water source. In some parts of the patients with other forms of gastroenteritis. The most com- world, copepods are responsible for maintaining Vibrio spp. in a mon error is for clinicians to underestimate the speed and viable but non-cultivable state. The incubation period ranges between 12 hours and 5 days. volume of fluids required for rehydration. Patients are usually afebrile and do not have any abdominal pain. Up to 80 % of sufferers can be treated successfully through The major clinical challenge is dehydration, ranging from mild to prompt administration of oral rehydration salts (WHO/ severe, and electrolyte imbalance leading on to renal failure in UNICEF ORS standard sachets). In adults, 2 to 4 litres of severe cases. ORS may be required in the first 4 hours. In epidemics, the diagnosis of cholera may be presumptive on clinical and epidemiological grounds following the WHO clinical Patients with severe cholera typically require an average of case definition. Laboratory confirmation may be required when 200 m L/kg of isotonic oral or IV fluids in the first 24 hours sporadic cases occur or when an extensive outbreak requires (Table 14.2). The initial fluid deficit should be replaced confirmation and typing of the etiological agent. within 3 to 4 hours of initial presentation. 10 to 20 m L/kg Treatment typically involves isolation of the patient, correction bodyweight should be calculated for each diarrhoeal stool of dehydration and antimicrobial treatment. In most cases oral replacement solutions may be used. Antimicrobial therapy is or episode of vomiting. secondary; it is shown to decrease shedding of the bacteria and Antibiotic therapy in cholera is secondary; but in patients also hastens clinical resolution of illness. Tetracycline and doxywith severe disease, appropriate antibiotics diminish the cycline are the preferred drugs in adults, but ciprofloxacin or duration of diarrhoea, reduce the volume of rehydration macrolides can also be used depending on availability and local fluids needed and shorten the duration of V. cholerae excre- resistance pattern. Public health measures to improve water and sanitation tion. In Bangladesh, resistance to furazolidone and tetracyare essential for long-term control. WHO has endorsed the cline is increasing. inclusion of oral vaccines in cholera control programmes in endemic areas in conjunction with other preventive and control The Case Continued… strategies. The patient was admitted immediately and started on intravenous rehydration with Ringer’s lactate solution. After receiving 3 L in the first hour her pulse rate and blood pres- Further Reading sure picked up to 84 bpm and 100 /70 mm Hg respectively. Over the next 3 hours she was given an additional 2 L and 1. Kang G, Hart CA, Shears P. Bacterial enteropathogens. In: Farrar J, became alert and responsive. She was then started on oral editor. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; rehydration and given a single dose of 300 mg doxycycline. 2013 [ She was discharged on the third day, by which time stool 2. Clemens JD, Nair GB, Ahmed T, et al. Cholera. Lancet 2017;390 consistency had returned to normal. (10101):1539–49. 3. Holmgren J, Svennerholm AM. Vaccines against mucosal infec The local health authorities identified an additional 44 tions. Curr Opin Immunol 2012;24(3):343–53. cases of cholera. All were treated, health education carried 4. Klontz EH, Das SK, Ahmed D, et al. Long term comparison of out and the overhead tanks were chlorinated. antibiotic resistance in Vibrio cholerae 01 and Shigella species between urban and rural Bangladesh. Clin Infect Dis 2014;58 SUMMARY BOX (9):e 133–6. Cholera Cholera, caused by V. cholerae, is a major cause of acute dehydrating diarrhoea, particularly in South and South-east Asia, where it is endemic; it also occurs as large-scale outbreaks in Africa and Latin America. V. cholerae is an aerobic Gram-negative bacillus with typical darting motility. Man is the only natural host of V. cholerae and