15 A 3-Year-Old Boy from Laos With Right Suppurative Parotitis SAYAPHET RATTANAVONG, VIRAVONG DOUANGNOULAK, BUACHAN NORINDR, PAUL N. NEWTON AND CAOIMHE NIC FHOGARTAIGH Clinical Presentation History A 3-year-old rural Lao boy presents to the ENT clinic with a 10-day history of gradual, painful swelling of the right cheek with associated fever and poor appetite. Three days previously his mother noticed a purulent discharge from the ear. He has no cough, vomiting or diarrhoea. There is no history of previous ear infection or dental problems and no known history of trauma. The child is developing normally and is up to date with vaccinations. His parents are rice farmers. Clinical Findings The child looks unwell, with a fever of 39.5°C (103.1°F). There is a localized, fluctuant, hot, tender swelling below and anterior to the right ear, 6 to 8 cm in diameter, extending from the lower cheek to the submandibular region and consistent with a parotid mass ( a purulent discharge in the auditory canal and suspicion of a small fistula from which the pus is arising, with a right lower local inflammation. motor neuron facial nerve palsy. The oral cavity and throat are unremarkable. There is no lymphadenopathy and no hepatosplenomegaly. Heart sounds are normal and the chest is clear. Answer to Question 1 Laboratory Results What Are Your Differential Diagnoses? Acute, suppurative, unilateral parotitis in children is usually WBC 16.5 109 /L (4–10 x 109 /L), 90 % neutrophils. Hb bacterial. The most common pathogens are Staphylococcus 9.4 g/d L (13–15 g/d L), all other blood tests are normal. aureus, Streptococcus pyogenes and Haemophilus influenzae, Questions although the latter has declined because of widespread vaccination. Neonates are at risk of parotitis caused by Gram 1. What are your differential diagnoses? negative bacteria, and Streptococcus pneumoniae parotitis 2. What investigations would you perform? may occur in HIV-infected children. In an endemic area like Laos, Burkholderia pseudomallei, Discussion the causative agent of melioidosis, must also be considered. Studies in neighbouring countries have shown melioidosis to A 3-year-old boy from rural Laos presents to a local hospital be the commonest cause of suppurative parotitis in children. because of high fever, unilateral parotid swelling and purulent Actinomycosis and cat-scratch disease (Bartonella henselae) discharge from his ear. The little boy has previously been well. are more unusual bacterial causes. 37 --- PAGE BREAK -- 38 Mumps was the commonest cause of parotid swelling in with good clinical response. No complications occurred, and children until the introduction of vaccination, which is still no underlying disease was identified. Being from a rice farmnot commonly available in some countries, including Laos. ing family, the boy was likely to have been frequently Swelling is painful, but is non-suppurative and becomes exposed to soil and water containing B. pseudomallei in the bilateral in the majority of cases. Other less common viral paddy fields. agents causing parotitis include parainfluenza viruses, influenza A, cytomegalovirus, Epstein–Barr virus and enterovi- SUMMARY BOX ruses, but these do not cause the degree of inflammation Melioidosis and suppuration seen here. Granulomatous parotitis, caused by Mycobacterium tuber- Melioidosis is an infectious disease caused by B. pseudomallei, a culosis, Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare and other myco- saprophytic Gram-negative environmental bacterium endemic in South and South-east Asia, as well as in northern Australia. It is bacteria, is rare and presents with a more chronic, painless, the third most common cause of death in north-east Thailand enlarging mass without surrounding inflammation. Salivary after HIV and tuberculosis. There is growing evidence that stones and malignancies are very rare in children. melioidosis is also of relevance in other parts of the tropics where its importance has long been underestimated. Answer to Question 2 In endemic areas B. pseudomallei is readily isolated from soil What Investigations Would You Perform? and surface water. The disease is highly seasonal and most cases present during the rainy season. Samples for bacterial culture before commencing antimicro The clinical presentation ranges from mild localized infection to bial therapy are crucial. Gram stain and bacterial culture of severe septicaemia. In endemic areas, 60–80 % of children have pus from the ear are quick and non-invasive. Blood cultures evidence of seroconversion to B. pseudomallei by the age of should be taken because the results have therapeutic and 4 years and most paediatric infections are mild or asymptomatic. Septicaemic melioidosis occurs in more than one-third of prognostic implications. paediatric cases, with a similar clinical presentation as in adults. A throat swab may detect causative bacterial pathogens The lung is the most common organ involved, and septic shock is and has been used to diagnose melioidosis in children. Deep associated with a high mortality. Multiple organ involvement and pus from incision and drainage of the parotid abscess is the disseminated infections are well described. Localized disease, most useful diagnostic material, and drainage may be neces- however, accounts for the majority of paediatric melioidosis, with the parotid gland being the most common site involved. Skin and sary for management of the abscess. This may be performed soft tissue abscesses are also common. Parotitis is uncommon in under ultrasound guidance. adults and has not been seen in children in Australia. Full blood count may help differentiate between bacte- It is believed that ingestion of water contaminated with rial and viral causes. When melioidosis is suspected, B. pseudomallei may cause colonization of the oropharynx and chest radiograph and abdominal ultrasound should be ascending infection to the parotid gland, particularly where drinking water is obtained from boreholes. Less than 10 % of children have a requested to look for other foci of infection. In this patient predisposing condition. The prognosis is usually favourable, a radiograph of the skull would be useful to detect any although complications include spontaneous rupture into the osteomyelitis. auditory canal, facial nerve palsy, septicaemia and osteomyelitis. The laboratory must be informed if melioidosis is sus- The aims of treatment are to reduce mortality and morbidity, pected, because selective media are used to isolate B. pseudo- prevent recurrence and drain abscesses. Referral to a surgeon for consideration for drainage should be arranged; however, such mallei from non-sterile sites, and suspected growth must be surgery risks damage to the facial nerve. There is little evidence to handled under containment level 3 conditions when inform the choice and duration of antimicrobial treatment for available. localized melioidosis in children. The authors recommend pre If melioidosis is confirmed, investigations should look cautionary intravenous ceftazidime, meropenem or imipenem for for underlying predisposing conditions such as diabetes the acute phase (10–14 days); however, parenteral therapy is very expensive. This is followed by co-trimoxazole monotherapy for mellitus, although these are found less commonly in chilthe eradication phase (12–20 weeks), which has been shown to dren with B. pseudomallei parotitis than in adults with be non-inferior to dual therapy with co-trimoxazole and doxycymelioidosis. cline and avoids adverse effects of doxycycline in children. Amoxicillin-clavulanate is an alternative for patients with sulfa allergy or resistance and in pregnancy. The Case Continued… Pus culture from the right ear and parotid abscess isolated B. Further Reading pseudomallei. Blood culture was negative. Chest radiography and abdominal ultrasound were normal. 1. Dance DAB. Melioidosis. In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical The patient had incision and drainage of the parotid with Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 [ removal of copious pus. Intravenous ceftazidime was admin- 2. Lumbiganon P, Viengnondha S. Clinical manifestations of melioidosis in children. Pediatr Infect Dis J 1995;14(2):136–40. istered for 10 days followed by oral co-amoxiclav for 16 weeks --- PAGE BREAK -- 3. Stoesser N, Pocock J, Moore CE, et al. Paediatric suppurative par- 5. Chetchotisakd P, Chierakul W, Chaowagul W, et al. Trimethootitis in Cambodia between 2007 and 2011. Paediatr Infect Dis J prim-sulphamethoxazole versus trimethoprim-sulphamethoxazole 2012;31(8):865–8. plus doxycycline as oral eradicative treatment for melioidosis 4. Phetsouvanh R, Phongmany S, Newton P, et al. Melioidosis and (MERTH): A multicentre, double-blind, non-inferiority, rando Pandora’s box in the Lao People’s Democratic Republic. Clin Infect mised controlled trial. Lancet 2014;383:807–14. https://doi. org/ Dis 2001;32(4):653–4. 10.1016 /S 0140-6736(13)61951-0.