16 A 25-Year-Old Female School Teacher from Malawi With Abrupt Onset of Fever and Confusion EMMA C. WALL Clinical Presentation TABLE Blood Results on Admission 16.1 History Parameter Patient Reference A 25-year-old Malawian primary school teacher presents to a WBC ( 109 /L) 10.5 4–10 local central hospital. She was reported to be well at 8 a. m., confused by 10 a. m. and drowsy with a high fever and con- Neutrophil count ( 109 /L) 8.9 2.5–6 vulsions on admission at 11 a. m. Haemoglobin (g/d L) 8.9 12–14 She is HIV-positive and has been on first-line antiretrovi MCV (f L) 85 78–90 ral therapy (ART) with tenofovir, lamivudine and efavirenz for 6 months with good adherence. Her CD 4 count on start- Platelets ( 109 /L) 255 150–400 ing ART was 320 cells/μL. She completed treatment for pul- Creatinine (μmol/L) 106 35–106 monary tuberculosis 2 months ago. Random blood glucose (mmol/L) 5.6 3.9–7.8 Clinical Findings The patient is restless and agitated; Glasgow Coma Scale 10 / 15. Pupils are equal and reactive with photophobia; the neck TABLE is stiff and there is no rash. Plantar responses are down-going, Results on Admission 16.2 Kernig’s sign is positive. Chest and abdominal examinations are unremarkable. Temperature 40°C (104°F), pulse Parameter Patient Reference 125 bpm, blood pressure 125 /68 mm Hg, oxygen saturation Leukocytes (cells/μL) 35 (60 % neutrophils) 0–5 /μL 93 % on room air. During the physical examination she suffers a renewed seizure. Protein (g/L) 2.6 0.15–0.42 Glucose (mmol/L) 1.2 2.5–5 Laboratory Results Her blood results are shown in Table 16.1. A spinal tap is done. The CSF appears hazy; CSF results are shown in Discussion is negative. A 25-year-old Malawian woman, known to be HIV-positive and on ART, presents with acute severe symptoms including Questions a high fever, a rapid decline in consciousness and new onset convulsions, suggesting a severe neurological infection. Her 1. What are your treatment priorities for this woman? CSF is hazy and shows a neutrophilic pleocytosis, as well as a 2. What adjunctive interventions should be used in this high CSF-protein and low glucose. setting? 40 --- PAGE BREAK -- Bacterial meningitis is the most likely diagnosis; tubercu- The main differential diagnoses for this patient are cryplous meningitis and cryptococcal meningitis are possibilities, tococcal meningitis (CCM) and TB meningitis (TBM). though much less likely, since they tend to present in a sub- However, her CD 4 count is too high for CCM and her acute manner. recent completion of TB treatment makes TBM less likely. In addition, both of these infections classically have a more chronic course. Answer to Question 1 She is not pregnant, therefore meningitis caused by Listeria monocytogenes is very unlikely. Bacterial pathogens that What Are Your Treatment Priorities cause meningitis in HIV-infected adults include S. pneumofor This Woman? niae, group A streptococci, Staphylococcus aureus, invasive The suspected diagnosis is acute bacterial meningitis. In non-typhoidal salmonellae, Salmonella typhi, Escherichia coli Africa Streptococcus pneumoniae is the most common cause and Haemophilus influenzae; all will be treated with a thirdof meningitis in adults and children. Additionally, in the generation cephalosporin. European guidelines recommend meningitis belt, seasonal outbreaks of bacterial meningitis 14 days of antibiotics in HIV-infected adults with bacterial caused by Neisseria meningitis occur during the dry season. meningitis. However, in sub-Saharan Africa often shorter Case numbers have dropped considerably after the introduc- courses are given, determined by the patient’s recovery rate, tion of large-scale vaccination programmes. local guidelines and availability of antibiotics for long The immediate treatment priority is emergency resuscitacourses. In children with bacterial meningitis in Malawi, tion, including rapid administration of antibiotics. A third 5 days of ceftriaxone was shown to be non-inferior to ten generation cephalosporin such as ceftriaxone at a high dose to days, with substantial savings shown, and shorter courses penetrate the CSF is appropriate; where this is not available, are now commonly used. high dose benzylpenicillin plus chloramphenicol is a suitable alternative. Resistance rates of S. pneumoniae to both penicil The Case Continued… lins and chloramphenicol are rising, hence local advice about resistance patterns should be sought. Data to guide resusci In the emergency department the patient received ceftriaxtation in adults are limited, but airway support and seizure one 2 g IV, 10 mg of diazepam IV and 600 mg of phenobarcontrol are indicated. Public health services are required bitone IV. Her oxygen saturation improved with for case management to ensure that appropriate vaccination resuscitation. She received 10 days of IV ceftriaxone and programmes and case notification for outbreak monitoring recovered consciousness by day 3. CSF culture grew S. pneuare done. moniae. Audiometry revealed a minor hearing loss in her right ear. No further neurological impairment or seizures Answer to Question 2 were noted; anticonvulsants were weaned by day 3. What Adjunctive Interventions Should be Used in SUMMARY BOX This Setting and What Are Your Differential Diagnoses? Acute Bacterial Meningitis Several meta-analyses suggest that while in well-resourced In resource-rich settings, acute bacterial meningitis in adults and countries dexamethasone should be given to adults and chil- children is declining in incidence because of successful vaccination campaigns, but sporadic cases continue to occur. dren presenting to hospital with meningitis, steroids should In contrast, many countries with high HIV prevalence have not be used in resource-limited hospitals in Africa given their reported an increase in patients presenting with acute bacterial lack of efficacy. Glycerol has been tested in paediatric men- meningitis (ABM) since the start of the HIV epidemic. ingitis with mixed results but was shown to be harmful in Case fatality rates in resource-rich settings have declined from adults with meningitis in Malawi. No other adjuncts have 45–50 % to 11–25 % over the past 50 years, associated with early administration of broad-spectrum antibiotics and better supbeen tested in clinical trials to date; adjunctive treatment portive care. In contrast, adult ABM lethality rates in sub-Saharan is not indicated. Africa are reported to vary between 50 and 70 % without any In cases of suspected meningitis, a lumbar puncture (LP) change over time, and survivors experience higher rates of must be undertaken to obtain a diagnosis. Despite clinical neurological disabilities. contraindications to lumbar puncture in this patient (sei- Adjunctive treatments have failed to reduce lethality in large zures and altered conscious level), the risk of causing harm randomized controlled trials in Africa despite efficacy elsewhere. In well-resourced settings, important risk factors for poor by doing an LP is low. LP should not be delayed by attempts outcome include advanced age, hyperglycaemia and to obtain cerebral imaging unless obvious signs of a space- immunosuppression. In Africa, coma, seizures, anaemia and occupying lesion are present. CT scan of the brain is of lim- delayed presentation to hospital are poor prognostic ited value in bacterial meningitis. Administration of antibi- features. Antibiotic treatment depends on local sensitivities. otics should not be delayed while the LP is undertaken, A third-generation cephalosporin at high dose given as early as possible is the treatment of choice. particularly in resource-limited settings. --- PAGE BREAK -- 42 Further Reading 3. Wall EC, Mukaka M, Denis B, et al. Goal directed therapy for suspected acute bacterial meningitis in adults and adolescents in sub 1. Heckmann JE, Bhigjee AI. Tropical neurology. In: Farrar J, editor. Saharan Africa. Plo S One 2017;12(10)e 0186687. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 4. van de Beek D, Farrar JJ, de Gans J, et al. Adjunctive dexametha[ 2. van de Beek D, Cabellos C, Dzupova O, et al. ESCMID guideline: data. Lancet Neurol 2010;9(3):254–263. diagnosis and treatment of acute bacterial meningitis. Clin Micro- 5. Global Burden of Diseases Study Collaborators. Global, regional, biol Infect 2016;22(Suppl 3):S 37–S 62. and national burden of meningitis, 1990-2016: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2016. Lancet Neurol 2018;17(12):1061–1082.