19 A 40-Year-Old Man from Togo With Subcutaneous Nodules and Corneal Opacities GUIDO KLUXEN Clinical Presentation History A 40-year-old man from Togo presents to a local clinic. He has noticed changes in both of his eyes over the past 4 years. There are no visual disturbances, but he is worried: In his village there are adults in each family who have turned completely blind after their eyes had shown features very similar to the changes he has noticed in his own eyes. He has also observed some painless bumps under his skin which have developed over the past two decades. The patient also complains of suffering from intense itching of his skin that keeps him awake at night. H. Trojan) The patient has always lived in a village in the savannah near a fast-flowing river. He reports that small biting flies are common near the river. Clinical Findings There are opacities in the cornea of both eyes. The patient’s left eye is shown in Figure 19.1. The skin appears atrophic in some areas (thinning with loss of elasticity), and there are multiple scratch marks. Subcutaneous nodules are palpable in various regions of his body, especially over bony prominences like the ribs ( The nodules are firm, non-tender and measure 1 to 3 cm in diameter. Questions 1. What is your most important differential diagnosis? 2. What investigations would you like to carry out? H. Trojan) 49 --- PAGE BREAK -- 50 Discussion worm-specific DNA (Ov 150) is tested by poolscreen in vector samples (black flies) using polymerase chain reaction. The patient presents with a triad of corneal opacities, skin changes and subcutaneous nodules. He comes from a village The Case Continued… in the North of Togo, located close to a rapidly flowing river. Many adults in the village are blind. The patient was treated with ivermectin (150 μg/kg) STAT which was repeated after 3 months and after 1 year. He also received doxycycline 100 mg/d for 6 weeks (see Summary Answer to Question 1 Box). What is Your Most Important Differential Diagnosis? SUMMARY BOX The clinical triad of ocular changes, itchy dermatitis with Onchocerciasis atrophy of the skin and subcutaneous nodules in a patient from rural Togo makes onchocerciasis (river blindness) the Onchocerciasis (‘river blindness’) is caused by O. volvulus, a filarial nematode. It is transmitted by biting Simulium species most likely differential diagnosis. A fast-flowing river is the preferred breeding site for Simulium blackflies, which trans- b fe la m c a k l f e li s es o , f w O h . ic v h olv b u re lu e s d lo in dg ra e p i i n dl h y u f m low an in s g u f b re c s u h ta w n a e t o e u r. s A t d is u s l u t e and mit the disease. shed live microfilariae. Microfilariae migrate through the skin and The picture of his left eye shows keratitis semilunaris, a often into the eyes. Most pathology is caused by immune reacform of band-shaped sclerosing keratopathy commonly seen tions to dead and dying microfilariae and perhaps to their endosymbiotic Wolbachia bacteria. Typical clinical features of in onchocerciasis. The central and upper parts of the cornea onchocerciasis are: are initially clear, but may become affected as the disease 1. Non-tender subcutaneous nodules located mainly over bony progresses. prominences Subcutaneous nodules can resemble lipomas and cysti- 2. Dermatitis, depigmentation of the skin (‘leopard skin’), cerci of Taenia solium. lichenification and thickening of the skin (‘lizard skin’), and skin atrophy at times leading to ‘hanging groins’. The skin Pruritic dermatitis may also be caused by scabies or be changes may be stigmatizing and the unrelenting itch may seen in papular pruritic eruptions associated with HIV cause sleep disturbances, depression and even lead to infection. In patients from West Africa, infection with suicide Mansonella streptocerca can also cause pruritus. Chronic 3. Ocular changes may present as pear-shaped pupil, puncdermatitis can also be seen in yaws, leprosy, mycotic infec- tate subepithelial stromal keratopathy, sclerosing keratitis, iritis, uveitis, ‘flecked retina’ or scarred choroidoretinal funtions and eczema. dus (Hissette–Ridley fundus). Optic nerve atrophy may occur. Answer to Question 2 Ivermectin is now the drug of choice for individual and mass What Investigations Would You Like to Carry Out? treatment of onchocerciasis. Ivermectin kills microfilariae but has little effect on adult worms apart from reducing embryogenesis. It The patient’s presentation appears very typical for onchocerhas to be given repeatedly throughout the lifespan of the adult ciasis. In an endemic, resource-limited setting his diagnosis worm (10–14 years). For individual treatment, ivermectin is prowould most probably be made on clinical grounds alone. vided as a single dose of 150 μg/kg PO. Treatment should be Skin snips taken from the vicinity of a subcutaneous nodule repeated in 3- to 6-month intervals. In mass treatment promay show microfilariae of Onchocerca volvulus. grammes it is usually provided annually. Ivermectin should not be given to patients with heavy Loa loa infections and microfilarial Slit-lamp examination of the eyes may reveal microfilariae counts greater than 30,000 /m L, because this may result in fatal in the anterior chamber of the eye and in the cornea. Nodu- encephalitis. Ivermectin can also cause significant adverse events lectomy of subcutaneous nodules may show adults of O. vol- in patients with lower microfilarial counts. For regions co-endemic vulus, but this is not routinely done. of onchocerciasis and L. loa, a mobile phone-based, point-ofcare microscopy tool – the Loa Scope – has proven helpful to Serological tests were less useful in patients from endemic easily identify patients with high parasitaemia of L. loa and to areas in the past, because antibody test results lacked speciexempt them from mass treatment with ivermectin. This techficity and were not clearly linked to clinical disease. nology has increased the acceptance of ivermectin MDA for However, serological tests which detect Ig G 4 responses to onchocerciasis and lymphatic filariasis in L. loa co-endemic areas. O. volvulus antigen (Ov Ag) and the recombinant Ov 16 anti- Ivermectin is contraindicated in pregnancy and in children below the age of five or below a height of 90 cm. gen are recommended by WHO. In case of a positive result it Doxycycline at a dosage of 100 to 200 mg/d for 4 to 6 weeks is recommended to continue ivermectin therapy. kills the Wolbachia endosymbionts, permanently sterilizes adult The lifespan of the adult worms is about 12 years. After worms, blocks embryogenesis and slowly kills approximately 10 years, usually no further treatment with ivermectin is 60 % of adult worms. required after therapy with a combination of ivermectin A major breakthrough in the battle against onchocerciasis was the ivermectin-donation programme initiated by the producing and doxycycline, if ivermectin was administered 2 to 3 company Merck. Large control programmes implementing mass times every year and if serological tests have turned negadrug administration (MDA) of ivermectin in endemic areas in Africa tive. However, in onchocerciasis-endemic areas new infec- and South America lead to interruption of transmission of tions are possible. To calculate the probability of a onchocerciasis in many countries. reinfection through an individual black fly with O. volvulus, Elimination of the disease is still on the agenda. --- PAGE BREAK -- Further Reading control to elimination: steps towards stopping treatment. Int Health 2018;10:i 7–i 13. https://doi. org/10.1093 /inthealth/ihx 049. 1. Simonsen P, Fischer PU, Hoerauf A, et al. The filariases. 4. WHO. 2017 Onchocerciasis guidelines for stopping mass drug In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. administration and verifying the elimination of human onchocerci London: Elsevier; 2013 [ 2. D’Ambrosio MV, Bakalar M, Bennuru S, et al. Point-of-care quan- 10665 /204180 /9789241510011_eng. pdf?sequence¼1. tification of blood-borne filarial parasites with a mobile phone 5. Lawrence J, Sodahlon YK. Onchocerciasis: the beginning of the microscope. Sci Transl Med 2015;7(286):1–10. end. Int Health 2018;10:i 1–i 2. https://doi. org/10.1093 /inthealth/ 3. Cantey PT, Roy SL, Boakye D, Mwingira U, Ottesen EA, ihx 070. Hopkins AD, Sodahlon YK. Transitioning from river blindness