24 A 14-Year-Old Boy from Rural Tanzania With Difficulty in Walking WILLIAM P. HOWLETT Clinical Presentation affected, whereas their parents remained fine. He mentions that identical cases had occurred in his own and neighbour History ing villages at around the same time. A 14-year-old boy presents to his local hospital in rural Tanzania with a history of difficulty in walking. He had been well Clinical Examination until just over 2 years earlier when his illness suddenly started. He describes that he was walking home from school Clinically, he is well nourished with normal vital signs. Genwhen he first noticed that his legs began to feel heavy and eral examination is unremarkable. On neurological examinastarted to tremble, which caused him difficulty in walking, tion, he is fully orientated and higher mental function with a tendency to fall over. He slowly completed the jour- appears normal. Cranial nerves are normal but bilateral optic ney home; and since that day, he has been unable to stand or pallor was noted on fundoscopy. Limbs reveal signs of spastic walk unaided. He now stands on his toes and drags his legs paraparesis with flexion contractures at both ankles and around with the aid of a stick ( tory of fever, pain, sensory, bladder or bowel symptoms or coming gravity), with the knee extensors and foot dorsiflexdisease progression. ors involved to the greatest extent ( His history is otherwise unremarkable. He lives in a village bilateral hypertonia, hyperreflexia and sustained ankle clonus in northern Tanzania in a rural area with limited agricultural with extensor plantar responses. The arms are normal apart suitability, where the main staple food crop is cassava. His from generalized hyperreflexia. There is no impairment or diet for the 2 months before the illness was almost exclusively loss of sensation. A lumbar lordosis with thoracic kyphoscocassava. He has three other siblings, one of whom is similarly liosis is noticeable only on standing. 2 years earlier and had an acute onset. Several other people are also affected in his own and neighbouring villages. 64 --- PAGE BREAK -- Investigations these agents’ high long-term cost. Surgical treatment involving Achilles tendon lengthening operations have proved use Full blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, blood gluful in improving mobilization in selected patients with cose and creatinine are normal. Urine analysis is normal. konzo. Because of the severity of contractures in this patient, Microscopy of urine and stool specimens does not show any ova of Schistosoma species. HIV serology and VDRL he should be assessed for surgery. are negative. Lumbar puncture is normal. Radiographs of the chest and thoracolumbar spine are normal. The Case Continued… Questions At follow-up examination at 6 and 12 months, the findings were unchanged, with a permanent spastic paraparesis. The 1. What is the clinical diagnosis and the likely cause in this patient had not been referred for surgery because of the lack patient? of resources and the extent of the epidemic, with many other 2. How do you plan to manage this patient? similar cases in the community. He uses one stick with very restricted mobility and works as a shoe repairer in his village. Discussion SUMMARY BOX A 14-year-old boy from rural northern Tanzania presents with acute-onset non-progressive spastic paraplegia. There Konzo is no history of back pain. On examination, there is no sensory impairment and no bladder dysfunction. The main sta- Konzo is a distinct form of tropical spastic paraparesis, which ple food crop in his village is cassava. occurs exclusively in cassava-growing areas in Africa. The word “konzo” means “tied legs” in the language of the Yaka tribe in the DRC. It is characterized by an abrupt onset of a permanent but Answer to Question 1 non-progressive form of spastic paraparesis related to cassava What is the Clinical Diagnosis? consumption. It occurs mainly as epidemics, typically during droughts, famines or armed conflict when there is an overreliance The clinical syndrome is spastic paraparesis. The main differenon cassava as a staple food for weeks or months. It also occurs in tial diagnosis in Africa includes spinal tuberculosis (Pott’s dis- an endemic form but at much lower rates. It affects mainly children ease), transverse myelitis, spinal cord infections such as and breastfeeding mothers. schistosomiasis and tuberculous myelitis, spinal malignancy The following are the clinical criteria for diagnosing konzo: symmetrical spastic paraparesis without sensory or geni (mainly metastases) and tropical nutritional myeloneuropathies. tourinary involvement There are three important features in our case: (1) the abrupt onset in less than 1 week with a non-progressive isolated involvement of motor neurons without any sensory course and bladder involvement; (2) the absence of back pain; and occurring in a cassava-growing area, usually with other (3) the acute onset with no progression over 2 years. These cases emerging at the same time no other cause found three clinical points make spinal tuberculosis, spinal cord Its cause is attributed to chronic high dietary exposure of infection or spinal malignancy very unlikely. Of note, his cyanogenic glycosides from insufficiently processed cassava diet (and probably that of his siblings and other children tubers, but the exact pathogenic mechanisms of konzo remain in the village) for the 2 months before the illness was almost unknown. exclusively cassava, and the same disease has affected one of Cassava is a staple food for more than 600 million people. It grows well in poor soils and is resistant to drought, plant diseases, his siblings and more children in the neighborhood. Hence, a insects and animal predators, but it contains cyanogenic glyconutritional cause must be suspected. sides, mainly linamarin. Processing disrupts the tubers releasing The tropical myeloneuropathies that are nutritional in cyanide, which makes the food safe for human consumption. origin are konzo and lathyrism. Lathyrism in Africa occurs Konzo is associated with high intake of insufficiently processed exclusively in Ethiopia. The clinical diagnosis in our patient cassava tubers in combination with low or absent levels of the essential amino acids methionine or cysteine. Oxidative stress is konzo. Konzo is a distinct form of tropical spastic paraparand glutamate-mediated neuro-excitatory cell death appears esis which occurs exclusively in cassava-growing areas in likely to be the final pathogenic mechanism. This results in a Africa. clinically exclusive pattern of upper motor neurone disease. Answer to Question 2 How Do You Plan to Manage this Patient? Further Reading There is no cure for patients with konzo because it results in a permanent spastic paraparesis. Management is therefore 1. Aronson J. Plant Poisons and Traditional Medicines. In: Farrar J, directed at support, symptomatic improvement and disease editor. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; prevention. The majority of patients can walk with the aid 2014 [ of a stick or crutches and some will benefit from a wheelchair. 2. Howlett WP, Brubaker GR, Mlingi N, et al. Konzo, an epidemic Muscle relaxants have a limited role because of relative inef- upper motor neuron disease studied in Tanzania. Brain 1990;113 fectiveness as a result of the severity of the spasticity, and (Pt 1):223–35. --- PAGE BREAK -- 66 3. Nzwalo H, Cliff J. Konzo: from poverty, cassava, and cyanogen Tanzania and University of Bergen; 2012. Available at: https:// intake to toxico-nutritional neurological disease. PLo S Negl bora. uib. no. Trop Dis 2011;5(6):e 1051. https://doi. org/10.1371 /journal. 5. Kashala-Abotnes E, Okitundu D, Mumba D, et al. Konzo: a dispntd.0001051. tinct neurological disease associated with food (cassava) cyanogenic 4. Howlett WP. Paraplegia. In: Howlett WP, editor. Neurology in poisoning. Brain Res Bull 2019;145:87–91. Africa. Norway: Kilimanjaro Christian Medical Centre, Moshi,