27 A 16-Year-Old Boy from Sri Lanka With Fever, Jaundice and Renal Failure RANJAN PREMARATNA Clinical Presentation TABLE Laboratory Results on Admission 27.1 History Parameter Patient Reference A 16-year-old Sri Lankan boy presents to a local hospital with WBC ( 109 /L) (neutrophils: 5.7 (68 %: 4–10 fever, frontal headache and severe body aches for 2 days. He lymphocytes) 31 %) has vomited two to three times during the illness and has not passed any urine for the previous 12 hours. He does not have Haemoglobin (g/d L) 14.8 12–16 a cough, coryza or shortness of breath. He has been attending Platelets ( 109 /L) 96 150–350 school until his illness. He had been fishing in an urban water AST (IU/L) 64 13–33 stream 5 days before falling ill. ALT (IU/L) 58 3–25 ALP (IU/L) 246 40–130 Clinical Examination Serum bilirubin total (μmol/L) 77 13.7–30.8 The boy appears ill and drowsy. He is jaundiced and has Serum bilirubin direct (μmol/L) 54.7 <5 subconjunctival haemorrhages ( 38.3°C (100.9°F), the pulse rate is 100 bpm (low in Blood urea nitrogen (μmol/L) 20.7 2.5–6.4 volume). The blood pressure is 90 /60 mm Hg. Serum creatinine (μmol/L) 212.2 71–106 There is no neck stiffness, however there is severe muscle C-reactive protein (mg/L) 48 <5 tenderness, mainly involving the abdominal wall and the calves such that the patient finds it difficult to walk. There is no lymphadenopathy. The cardiac apex is not shifted and heart sounds are clear. Examination of the lungs is normal. The liver is palpable at 4 cm below the right costal margin and is tender. The spleen is not palpable. There is mild bilateral renal angle tenderness. Neurological examination is normal. Further Investigations The laboratory findings are summarized in Table 27.1. The urine microscopy shows 20 red blood cells per high-power field, proteins ‘+’ and granular casts ‘+’. A chest radiograph is normal. An ECG shows sinus tachycardia. Questions 1. What is the most likely diagnosis and what are your differentials? 73 --- PAGE BREAK -- 74 Discussion For indirect diagnosis, the historical reference serological test is the microscopic agglutination test (MAT). MAT relies A Sri Lankan teenage boy presents with fever, severe body on incubation of patient serum with Leptospira antigen susaches and a reduced urine output. He is jaundiced with sub- pension and determines agglutination with a dark-field conjunctival haemorrhage and has a tender hepatomegaly. microscope. This method requires a high level of expertise He has had contact with a water stream before his ill health. and is limited to expert centres. His laboratory results show signs of cholestasis with only The MAT cannot differentiate between current or past mildly elevated transaminases. The creatinine is increased infections. Therefore two consecutive serum samples should twofold and there is thrombocytopenia. The leucocyte count be examined to look for seroconversion or at least a fourfold is normal. rise in titre. The significance of titres in single serum specimens is a matter of debate. Answer to Question 1 Various ELISA tests detecting anti-Leptospira Ig M are now commercially available, facilitating the diagnosis outside What is the Most Likely Diagnosis and What Are reference centres. It appears that sensitivity of these tests is Your Differentials? highly variable if blood is examined during week one of An acute febrile illness accompanied by jaundice, renal fail- the illness, it improves (75 % and 100 %) if blood is taken ure and subconjunctival haemorrhage should raise the suspi- after day 7. A positive Ig M ELISA should be confirmed cion of leptospirosis, particularly in case of a history by MAT. involving exposure to potentially contaminated water. Scrub typhus is another very common infection in South Asia. It may present with an acute onset of fever, hepatomeg- The Case Continued… aly and renal failure. There usually is lymphadenopathy; Severe leptospirosis was suspected and the patient was comand on careful examination, one may spot an eschar. menced on empirical benzylpenicillin. Despite rehydration Subconjunctival haemorrhage has been described but is less he developed acute renal failure warranting haemodialysis common than in leptospirosis, and complications such as (HD). He developed myocarditis and atrial fibrillation, renal failure tend to occur late in the infection (after about but luckily tolerated further HD. He gradually recovered 7 days). over 10 days with intensive care management. Hantavirus infection may cause a haemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome. It has a similar epidemiology to leptospirosis and is also associated with contact with rodent excreta. SUMMARY BOX Dengue haemorrhagic fever (DHF) is another differential diagnosis to consider. It also presents with fever, severe myal Leptospirosis gias, thrombocytopenia and haemorrhages. Acute kidney injury and jaundice are uncommon for DHF. Leptospirosis is a zoonotic disease that occurs worldwide. It is caused by pathogenic Leptospira species, which belong to the spirochaetes. The most common species causing disease in Answer to Question 2 humans and animals are L. interrogans and L. borgpetersenii. Humans become infected through direct contact with urine of What Tests Are Indicated to Confirm the infected mammalian hosts, contact with contaminated water or Diagnosis? animal abortion products. The major reservoirs are rodents, canines, livestock and wild mammals. Most at risk are slum The microscopic diagnosis of leptospirosis requires a darkdwellers and people with an occupational or recreational field or a phase-contrast microscope because the bacteria exposure involving animal contact or immersion in water. Also, stain poorly. However, dark-field microscopy is of poor sen- natural disasters such as hurricanes and floods may put people sitivity and specificity and only yields positive results during at risk. The bacteria enter the human body through cuts or abrasions the early bacteraemic phase of the disease. of the skin or through intact mucous membranes. The incubation Leptospira may be cultured from blood, CSF or urine. Isoperiod is 2 to 30 days. The spectrum of disease ranges from lation of the bacteria from blood or CSF is only possible dur- asymptomatic to severe infection. ing the first week of illness. Samples have to be incubated for The classical presentation of leptospirosis is that of a biphasic at least 8 weeks and analysed weekly with a dark-field micro- illness. The initial leptospiraemic phase usually starts abruptly. Symptoms are non-specific with fever, headache, sore throat, scope. This technique is laborious and not routine practice in abdominal pain and a rash. Severe myalgias, most notably of the a standard microbiological laboratory. calves and the lumbar area, and subconjunctival haemorrhage Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) detection has been used have been mentioned as distinguishing physical findings. This first on blood, CSF and urine. PCR performance varies between phase lasts for a week and is followed by a second phase types of samples taken and depends on the time the sample dominated by immune-mediated pathology. Five to ten per cent of those with clinical infection will develop was taken in relation to duration of illness. Sensitivity and severe leptospirosis with cholestatic jaundice, acute kidney injury specificity appear to be higher in urine than in blood and and haemorrhagic diathesis (Weil’s syndrome). Further compliare better in blood samples taken early rather than later dur- cations include pulmonary involvement, aseptic meningitis and ing the course of illness. myocarditis. --- PAGE BREAK -- Further Reading Leptospirosis is usually treated with antibiotics, although the usefulness of antibiotic treatment in particular during the second phase of illness, which is immune-mediated, has been 1. Chierakul KW. Leptospirosis. In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropdisputed. ical Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 [ For uncomplicated cases, oral doxycycline is the drug of 2. WHO. Human leptospirosis: guidance for diagnosis, surveillance choice. Alternatives include amoxicillin and azithromycin. In and control, In: World Health Organization and International severe infection benzylpenicillin, IV doxycycline, ceftriaxone or Leptospirosis Society. editors. Geneva: WHO; 2003. cefotaxime seem to have similar efficacy. Doxycycline 200 mg 3. Bharti AR, Nally JE, Ricaldi JN, et al. Leptospirosis: a zoonotic disweekly has been suggested as exposure prophylaxis. ease of global importance. Lancet Infect Dis 2003;3(12):757–71. 4. Eldin C, Jaulhac B, Bediannikov O, et al. Values of diagnostic tests for the various species of spirochetes. Med Mal Infect 2019;49 (2):102–11.