29 A 35-Year-Old Woman from Malawi With Fever and Severe Anaemia CAMILLA ROTHE Clinical Presentation TABLE Laboratory Results on Admission 29.1 History Parameter Patient Reference A 35-year-old Malawian woman presents to a local hospital because of fever and weakness. WBC ( 109 /L) 3.0 4–10 The fever started 3 days earlier, but the weakness has pro- Haemoglobin (mg/d L) 4.8 12–14 gressed over the past several months. There is no cough and MCV (f L) 90 80–99 no night sweats, but she reports some weight loss. There is no Platelets ( 109 /L) 112 150–400 diarrhoea, no dysuria and no history of abnormal bleeds. Two months earlier she presented to a local health centre because of her weakness. She was found to be clinically pale and was prescribed iron tablets, which she took. Neverthe- The results of her full blood count are shown in Table 29.1. less, the weakness progressed. Otherwise, the patient does not report any abnormalities. Questions She is divorced, with three children (17, 15 and 12 years old), who are all well. She works as a small-scale farmer and 1. What is the suspected diagnosis? sells vegetables on the local market. The family can afford 2. How would you manage this patient? three meals a day and occasionally meat or fish. Discussion Clinical Findings A 35-year-old Malawian woman presents in a state of sepsis A 35-year-old woman, wasted, body mass index 17 kg/m 2. without any clear focal symptoms. She is wasted and severely Blood pressure 90 /60 mm Hg (difficult to measure because anaemic and she newly tests HIV-positive. of the low upper arm circumference), pulse 110 bpm, tem- This is a very common clinical scenario in a highperature 37.8°C (100°F), respiratory rate 25 breath cycles prevalence setting for HIV in sub-Saharan Africa. per minute, oxygen saturation 97 % on ambient air, Glasgow Answer to Question 1 Coma Scale 15 /15. What is the Suspected Diagnosis? Her conjunctivae are very pale, but there is no jaundice. The examination of her mouth is normal, there is no oral The patient presents with a septic picture without a clear thrush, no Kaposi’s sarcoma lesions and no oral hairy leuko- focus; she is newly diagnosed HIV-positive and her wasting plakia. The chest is clear. The abdomen is soft, with slight and anaemia suggest advanced immunosuppression and/or diffuse tenderness, but no guarding. The spleen is palpable possible concomitant tuberculosis (TB). 3 cm below the left costal margin. The rectal examination The most common cause of sepsis in HIV-positive adults is normal. in many parts of sub-Saharan Africa is infection with invasive non-typhoidal Salmonellae (i NTS). The slight abdominal tenderness and her splenomegaly would also fit with this Investigations diagnosis. The malaria rapid diagnostic test is negative. The HIV serol- Enteric fevers (typhoid or paratyphoid) are clinically ogy comes back positive. indistinguishable from infection with i NTS, they are 79 --- PAGE BREAK -- 80 however far less common than i NTS in HIV-positive antibiotic treatment was changed to oral ciprofloxacin patients in sub-Saharan Africa. The reason for this is unclear. 500 mg tds which was continued for 14 days. TB screening Severe anaemia led to the non-specific feeling of progres- revealed prominent hilar lymph nodes and the patient was sive ‘weakness’ in this patient. It is most likely a consequence also commenced on antituberculous treatment and on antiof infection of her bone marrow with HIV, Salmonellae and retroviral therapy. She also received co-trimoxazole prophypossibly also with Mycobacterium tuberculosis. laxis, vitamin B to prevent peripheral neuropathy and 6 Other causes of severe anaemia, such as iron deficiency, therapeutic feeding. helminth infections and malaria, are less common in an She was discharged after 4 weeks in hospital. On review in HIV-positive urban adult population but may have to be ART clinic 3 months later she was feeling much better. She considered in other patients, in particular children, pregnant had gained weight and her haemoglobin levels were picking women or in the rural poor. Thalassaemia usually leads to a up. Her three children tested negative for HIV. Her exmicrocytic anaemia. husband refused to go for HIV-testing. Severe anaemia is very common in sub-Saharan Africa. Patients commonly present to healthcare facilities late, at SUMMARY BOX times only when they are developing heart failure secondary to severe anaemia. Invasive Non-Typhoidal Salmonellae (i NTS) Infection Visceral leishmaniasis may also cause fever and pancyto- S. enterica is a leading cause of community-acquired penia as seen in this patient. It usually causes gross hepatos- bloodstream infection in Africa and Asia. Typhoidal Salmonella plenomegaly which our patient does not have. It also appears species cause typhoid and paratyphoid, i. e. enteric fever. They are restricted to human hosts. Non-typhoidal Salmonellae are not to be endemic in Malawi, but should be considered in host generalists, colonizing and infecting a broad range of other parts of Africa, e. g. South Sudan, Northern Uganda vertebrate animals. and Northern Kenya, Ethiopia or Somalia. Non-typhoidal salmonellae (NTS) usually cause a self-limiting enterocolitis in immunocompetent individuals. In contrast, in sub Answer to Question 2 Saharan Africa (SSA) NTS commonly cause invasive disease resulting in sepsis and death. Important populations at risk for How Would You Manage This Patient? development of i NTS infection are infants and children living in Fluids and broad-spectrum antibiotics need to be started areas of high transmission intensity for falciparum malaria and/or immediately. Before starting antibiotic treatment, blood cul- with severe malnutrition, and adults with advanced HIV-infection. In Asia, enteric fever still prevails as a cause of invasive tures should be taken. Because bacteraemia may be low, it is salmonellosis, which may be associated with the lower important to inoculate a decent volume of blood (at least 20– prevalence of i NTS risk factors in the population. 40 ml) for culture. Both the reservoir and source of infection for i NTS remain Severe anaemia in an HIV-infected person commonly is a unclear. S. Typhimurium and S. Enteritidis are the most common sign of TB. Therefore the patient should be assessed for serovars, but it is unknown if the same strains cause invasive and diarrhoeal disease and if the modes of transmission are the same. underlying tuberculosis. A chest radiograph and an abdom Infection with i NTS commonly presents as a non-specific inal ultrasound scan should be done. If the CD 4-count is febrile illness. Some patients report abdominal pain or a history <100 cells/μl, a lateral flow urine lipoarabinomannan of diarrhoea, but often the focus remains clinically unclear. Mild (LAM) may also help confirm TB. splenomegaly occurs in more than one-third of patients, Of note, anaemia may be the only finding in a patient hepatomegaly is less common. About 30 % of patients with i NTS have a concomitant lower respiratory tract co-infection, with TB hiding in the bone marrow; and even if all routine with pathogens such as M. tuberculosis or Streptococcus investigations are unremarkable, TB should still be high on pneumoniae. Severe anaemia is common and should prompt the the list of possible diagnoses if the patient does not make a clinician to look carefully for signs of TB co-infection. satisfactory recovery, i. e. remains febrile and/or anaemic or Blood culture remains the diagnostic standard; however, it is continues to lose weight. not widely available in many African settings. Also, sensitivity of blood culture is suboptimal because of the low magnitude The baseline CD 4 count should be checked and the patient of bacteraemia (median <1 CFU/m L). Care should therefore be should be started on co-trimoxazole preventive treatment as taken to inoculate large enough volumes of blood for culture. prophylaxis against Pneumocystis pneumonia, toxoplasmosis Antimicrobial resistance among i NTS strains in Africa is and other opportunistic infections. Antiretroviral therapy increasing. Empirical management is similar to enteric fever and (ART) should be started as soon as possible, once the acute includes either a fluoroquinolone or azithromycin, depending on the local resistance pattern and drug availability. If oral intake is infection is under control and concomitant opportunistic not possible, a third-generation cephalosporin should be infections have been ruled out. The latter is important to preadministered. Effective antibiotic treatment should be given for vent unmasking immune reconstitution inflammatory syn- 10 to 14 days. Antiretroviral therapy should be started urgently drome (IRIS). Her children and her current and past sexual to prevent relapse. The case fatality rate of patients with i NTS partners should be encouraged to go for an HIV test. is much higher than in enteric fever (22–47 % vs 1 %). The Case Continued… Further Reading Blood cultures were taken and the patient was started on IV 1. Feasey NA, Gordon MA. Salmonella infections. In: Farrar J, editor. ceftriaxone 2 g od, as well as on fluid resuscitation. Blood Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 cultures grew Salmonella enterica var Typhimurium. Her [ --- PAGE BREAK -- 2. Feasey NA, Dougan G, Kingsley RA, et al. Invasive non-typhoidal 4. Reddy EA, Shaw AV, Crump JA. Community-acquired bloodsalmonella disease: an emerging and neglected tropical disease in stream infections in Africa: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Africa. Lancet 2012;379(9835):2489–99. Lancet Infect Dis 2010;10(6):417–32. 3. Lewis DK, Whitty CJ, Walsh AL, et al. Treatable factors associated 5. Crump JA, Heydermann RS. A perspective on Invasive Salmonella with severe anaemia in adults admitted to medical wards in Blan- Disease in Africa. Clin Infect Dis 2015;61(S 4):235–40. tyre, Malawi, an area of high HIV seroprevalence. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 2005;99(8):561–7.