30 A 12-Year-Old Boy from Rural Kenya With Painful Eyes HILLARY K. RONO, ANDREW BASTAWROUS AND NICHOLAS A. V. BEARE Clinical Findings Clinical Presentation A 12-year-old boy who appears systemically well. Very poor History vision in both eyes: His visual acuity is 6 /60 with the left eye, A 12-year-old boy is brought to a health centre in rural but he can only perceive hand movements with the right eye. north-west Kenya. He reports 2 months of painful, watery, The findings on examination are shown in Table 30.1 and red eyes. The watering of his eyes is worse in the sun and he is Figures 30.1 and 30.2. struggling to keep his eyes open. Six months previously he was treated at a dispensary for less severe symptoms. He was given tetracycline eye ointment but his symptoms did not improve. After this, he went to a traditional healer who applied some juice extracts from the ecucuka plant (Aloe vera species). After instillation he experienced severe eye pain and discharge, both eyes became very red and he could hardly see. The boy lives with his parents in Loima, Turkana County, a hot, dusty and dry area of Kenya. They fetch water from a dried riverbed about 6 kilometres from home. They keep herds of cows and sheep, and the boy helps with herding and watering. corneal opacification. TABLE Findings on Inspection of Both Eyes 30.1 Right Eye Left Eye Lid Fibrotic lids with loss of lid architecture and tightening of Lids swollen, mucus deposits, eyelashes misdirected palpebral aperture Eversion of lower lid margin Loss of lashes from lower lid, misdirected and in-turned upper lid lashes (trichiasis) Conjunctiva Severely inflamed >5 follicles (subepithelial inflammatory foci) identified on eversion of lids Scarring of the upper tarsal conjunctivae Cornea Diffuse corneal opacification (scarring) with central thinning Focal inferocentral corneal scars, one with adherent iris and irregular surface indicating previous perforation Fibrovascular pannus on the upper cornea Thin central cornea Anterior Not visible Shallow chamber Pupil Not visible Distorted towards the leucoma (corneal scar) 82 --- PAGE BREAK -- 3. Limbal follicles or Herbert’s pits. Follicles can occur at the edge of the cornea (limbus), and they leave 0.5 to 2 mm dark circular lesions (Herbert’s pits). 4. Fibrovascular pannus, mostly affecting the upper cornea. Ingrowth of fibrovascular tissue from the limbus ruining the transparency of the cornea. 5. Trichiasis on the upper lid. In-turning of the lashes so they scuff the cornea. The Case Continued… The child was diagnosed with bilateral trachomatous trichiasis (TT), corneal opacity (CO) and a left perforating corneal ulcer. These may have been exacerbated by the application of traditional medicine. rated corneal ulcer with adherent iris (leucoma). He was admitted and given oral azithromycin and oral vitamin A supplements. He was referred to the ophthalmol Questions ogist for lid surgery to redress trichiasis, and for a conjunctival flap to seal the corneal defect. 1. What are your differential diagnoses? 2. What features fit the criteria for trachoma? Discussion SUMMARY BOX A 12-year-old Kenyan boy from a pastoralist community in Trachoma an arid area presents with painful, red eyes, discharge and Trachoma, caused by Chlamydia trachomatis, is the leading poor vision. He has a history of using traditional eye medi- infectious cause of blindness in the world. It accounts for cine. On examination he has lid, conjunctival and corneal about 1.4 % of the world’s blindness, but rates in affected communities in Africa are much higher. In endemic areas, active scarring associated with severe follicular inflammation and trachoma prevalence in pre-school children can be as high as trichiasis (in-turning lashes). One eye has a perforated cor 60 % to 90 %. neal ulcer with scarred iris adhesion (leucoma). Trachoma is common in poor rural communities, where there is scarcity of water, poor sanitation and low socioeconomic sta Answer to Question 1 tus. The spread occurs because of overcrowding within households. Women are affected more than men and younger children What Are Your Differential Diagnoses? are at greater risk of infection, especially children under The most important diagnoses to consider are: 5 years old. 1. Corneal and conjunctival damage from use of traditional After repeated infections in childhood, signs of trachoma progress from conjunctival inflammation to scarring. Scarring of eye medicine. the tarsal conjunctiva leads to inversion of the lid resulting in tri 2. Trachomatous trichiasis. chiasis. Repetitive damage and infections lead to corneal scarring 3. Vitamin A deficiency. and consequent visual impairment or blindness. Further useful information includes dietary intake, his- A simplified scheme for assessing and classifying trachoma tory of measles predisposing to vitamin A deficiency and ide- based on clinical signs has been developed. The stages are: Trachomatous inflammation with follicles (TF) ally blood retinol (vitamin A) levels (this only drops once Intense trachomatous inflammation (TI) hepatic stores of vitamin A are severely depleted). Trachomatous conjunctival scarring (TS) Trachomatous trichiasis (TT) and Answer to Question 2 Corneal opacity because of trachoma (CO). TF and TI are prevalent in young children and are manifesta What Features Fit the Criteria for Trachoma? tions of moderate and severe active infection, while TT is common For the diagnosis of trachoma, two out of five clinical criteria in adults. WHO has a global programme to eliminate trachoma as a need to be fulfilled. This boy has all five criteria: disease of public health importance by 2020 (GET 2020). This 1. Follicles on the tarsal (inner) conjunctiva. These are 0.5 programme includes mass antibiotic administrations to reduce to 2 mm pale, raised inflammatory foci with hyperaemic the prevalence of Chlamydia infections, facial cleanliness, envisurround. Multiple follicles give a rough or dimpled ronmental improvement and surgery – the SAFE strategy: appearance to the surface of the conjunctiva. S Surgery for advanced cases. A Antibiotic treatment. 2. Conjunctival scarring of the upper tarsal conjunctiva. F Facial cleanliness to reduce transmission. White bands or strands evident on everting (flipping) E Environmental improvement. the upper eyelid which can also sometimes be seen on Both tetracyclines and macrolides are effective against trathe inner lower lid. choma in its acute stage (TF and TI). Tetracycline ointment can be --- PAGE BREAK -- 84 2. Mabey DC, Solomon AW, Foster A. Trachoma. Lancet 2003;362 applied twice daily for 6 weeks. However, adherence to this treatment is poor. A single oral dose of azithromycin is equally (9379):223–9. effective and more convenient (20 mg/kg for children, 1 g for 3. Negrel AD, Mariotti SP. Trachoma rapid assessment: rationale and adults). The WHO recommends 3 years of annual azithromycin as basic principles. Community Eye Health/Int Cent Eye Health part of a trachoma control programme in communities where 1999;12(32):51–3. active trachoma is present in >10 % of children. However, without 4. Emerson PM, Burton M, Solomon AW, et al. The SAFE strategy additional environmental and economic improvement antibiotic for trachoma control: using operational research for policy, plantreatment will not have a permanent effect. Communities need to ning and implementation. Bull WHO 2006;84(8):613–9. secure suitable water supply, build and use well-designed 5. WHO. Trachoma. Available from https://www. who. int/newslatrines, safely dispose of rubbish and house animals apart from room/fact-sheets/detail/trachoma (accessed 27.06.2019.). the family home. Further Reading 1. Beare NAV, Bastawrous A. Ophthalmology in the tropics and subtropics. In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 [chapter 67].