33 A 53-Year-Old Man from Malawi With a Chronic Cough CAMILLA ROTHE Clinical Presentation TABLE Laboratory Results on Admission 33.1 History Parameter Patient Reference A 53-year-old Malawian man presents to a local hospital with WBC ( 109 /L) 3.2 4–10 a productive cough and whitish sputum for 3 months. He also reports night sweats and some weight loss, which he is Haemoglobin (g/d L) 9.8 13–15 unable to quantify. MCV (f L) 90 80–98 Two months earlier he presented to a health centre with Platelets ( 109 /L) 305 150–350 the same complaints. He was given presumptive antimalarials and amoxicillin for 5 days, but to no avail. CD 4 count (cells/μL) 54 500–1200 The patient is not aware of any tuberculosis (TB) con- Sputum for AFB 2 negative Negative tacts. He is currently not on any medication and his past Malaria RDT Negative Negative medical history is unremarkable. He is a subsistence farmer. He has never worked in a mine or in the construction indus- Thick smear for Negative Negative Plasmodium spp. try. He is a non-smoker. He is married with five children; all are well. Clinical Findings 53-year-old man, slightly wasted. Temperature 38.8°C (101.8°F), blood pressure 100 /80 mm Hg, pulse 88 bpm, oxygen saturation 97 % on ambient air. He appears mildly anaemic. On inspection of his mouth there is no oral thrush, no Kaposi’s sarcoma and no oral hairy leukoplakia. His chest is clear and there are normal heart sounds without any murmurs. There is no lymphadenopathy; liver and spleen are not enlarged. Investigations The HIV-test is reactive. His further laboratory results are shown in Table 33.1. Chest Radiography His chest radiograph on admission shows a prominent hilar region bilaterally but is otherwise normal ( 90 --- PAGE BREAK -- Questions Apart from chest infections, Gram-negative sepsis secondary to invasive non-typhoidal Salmonellae (i NTS) needs to be 1. What is your suspected diagnosis? considered in this febrile and anaemic patient with advanced 2. How would you approach this patient? immunosuppression. Answer to Question 2 Discussion How Would You Approach This Patient? A 53-year-old Malawian man presents with chronic cough Induced sputum should be examined for acid-fast bacilli. and constitutional symptoms. A course of oral antibiotics Real-time PCR-based tests such as XPert MTB/RIF are did not yield any improvement. The patient is not aware easy to use, more sensitive than microscopy and also help of any TB contacts. On admission he is newly diagnosed detect rifampicin resistance. Thanks to an endorsement with HIV-infection and advanced immunosuppression. by WHO and international donor support, XPert MTB/ His sputum microscopy is negative for acid-fast bacilli RIF is increasingly available even at remote hospitals in (AFB). Chest radiography shows a prominent hilar region rural areas. but is otherwise normal. Mycobacterial cultures of the sputum should be done but results will take several weeks, too long to guide the clini Answer to Question 1 cian’s imminent decision. What is Your Suspected Diagnosis? Ideally, bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage should In all HIV-positive patients with cough and weight loss who be done and material assessed for M. tuberculosis (PCR, culdo not respond to antibiotic therapy, tuberculosis is top of ture, microscopy) and Pneumocystis jirovecii (PCR, microsthe list of differential diagnoses. In this case the most likely copy). Pulmonary Kaposi’s sarcoma could also be diagnosed diagnosis is smear-negative pulmonary TB. on endoscopy. TB in patients with advanced immunosuppression often Urine lipoarabinomannan (urine-LAM) is a simple presents with a clinical picture that is very different from lateral-flow assay helpful to look for TB in patients with immunocompetent individuals: sputum smear-negative advanced immunosuppression (CD 4 <100 /μl). A positive TB, which is uncommon in HIV-negative patients, is com- test indicates disseminated TB with renal involvement. monly seen in HIV-infected patients, particularly if immu- Ultrasound is also very useful and simple to look for signs nosuppression is advanced as in this case. The slightly of extrapulmonary/disseminated TB in patients with prominent hilar region seen on the patient’s chest radiograph advanced immunosuppression. Simple and very useful algois compatible with the intrathoracic lymphadenopathy: typ- rithms have been published to guide clinicians not ical though not specific for TB. Physical examination of the ultrasound-experienced in the diagnosis of TB. chest is normal in about half of HIV patients with If none of these investigations is available, it is well justipulmonary TB. fiable to empirically start the patient on antituberculous The fact that the patient does not report any TB contact treatment, because sputum smear-negative TB is common should not be overvalued. Firstly, TB in immunosuppression and fatal if untreated. Adding prednisolone for the first is often a consequence of reactivation and the primary infec- 4 weeks of antituberculous treatment has been shown to tion may have been decades ago. Secondly, in resource-limited reduce the incidence of immune-reconstitution inflammacountries, practically everyone is exposed to TB – this could tory syndrome (IRIS). occur during a ride on an overcrowded minibus or when con- Additional antibiotic treatment should be considered in gregating with friends and family in someone’s small home. this febrile patient with advanced immunosuppression. If Given the fact that our patient is in an advanced stage of available, blood cultures should be taken in any febrile immunosuppression and has not taken any co-trimoxazole patient before starting antibiotic treatment. Also, adding prophylaxis, an alternative or possibly co-existing diagnosis high-dose co-trimoxazole to antituberculous therapy as preto consider is Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia (PCP). A sumptive treatment for PCP has to be considered if the concomitant bacterial chest infection is possible but unlikely patient does not clinically improve. The optimal timing to explain the whole 3 months of illness. to initiate antiretroviral therapy (ART) is within the first Kaposi’s sarcoma (KS) of the lung is another differential 8 weeks of starting antituberculous treatment and within diagnosis to consider, but patients with pulmonary KS usu- the first 2 weeks for patients who have CD 4 cell counts ally have manifestations of KS elsewhere (skin, oral mucosa). <50 cells/μl. On chest radiography of patients with pulmonary KS, patchy infiltrations are commonly seen in the lower lung zones. Nei- The Case Continued… ther was the case in our patient, which makes this diagnosis unlikely. Induced sputum results came back negative for AFB and Pulmonary malignancy or pulmonary sarcoidosis, which there was no sputum PCR available. The patient’s exercise would be high on the list of differential diagnoses in indus- test (walking down the hospital corridor three times at a fast trialized countries, are much less likely than an infectious pace) showed oxygen saturation of 98 % as opposed to 97 % cause in the given setting. at rest, and was therefore negative. --- PAGE BREAK -- 92 The patient was treated for a possible bacterial chest infection, covering also for Gram-negative bacteria. He received ceftriaxone 2 g IV od and erythromycin 500 mg qid for 5 days. It was decided not to treat him for PCP and he received the prophylactic dose of co-trimoxazole (480 mg bid according to local national guidelines). Nonetheless, his fever persisted, even though the cough subjectively improved slightly. On day 7 in the hospital, the patient was started on empirical treatment for smear-negative TB with four antituberculous drugs (Isoniazid (H), Rifampicin (R), Pyrazinamide (P) and Ethambutol (E). After the first week of treatment, he started to feel better. His fever went down and the cough gradually settled. He was discharged home. Three weeks into the TB treatment he was seen at the HIV clinic. He was doing well and had started antiretroviral therapy. Cavitating smear-positive pulmonary TB, as seen classically in HIV-negative individuals, is uncommon in advanced immuno TABLE Clinical Presentation of TB in Patients With suppression. Instead, patients more commonly present with 33.2 and Without Immunosuppression sputum smear-negative pulmonary TB. CXR may be completely normal and clinical symptoms are often discrete; patients may HIV-negative or produce little sputum and haemoptysis is rare. HIV-positive individuals are also more likely to present with high CD 4 count Low CD 4 count (>200 /μL) ( 200 /μL) extrapulmonary TB manifesting as pleural effusion, pericardial disease, lymph node TB, abdominal TB, TB meningitis and miliary Cough and Severe, productive Often mild, small disease or a combination of these ( sputum amounts of common clinical clue to a co-infection with HIV/TB and reflects production whitish sputum bone marrow involvement. When treating HIV/TB co-infected patients, pharmacokinetic Haemoptysis Common Rare interactions between rifampicin and antiretroviral drugs have to be considered. Adding prednisolone during the first 4 weeks of Chest Cavities, upper No cavities antituberculous treatment may help decrease the risk of immuneradiography lobe infiltrates and Infiltrates reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS). appearance destruction Hilar lymphadenopathy Miliary pattern May be Further Reading completely normal 1. Thwaites G. Tuberculosis. In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical Sputum smear Often positive Often negative Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 [ result 2. Lawn SD. Advances in diagnostic assays for Tb. Cold Spring Harb Extrapulmonary 20 % of TB cases Common, about Perspect Med 2015;5:a 017806. and 50 % 3. Lawn SD, Brooks SV, Kranzer K, et al. Screening for HIVdisseminated Associated Tuberculosis and Rifampicin Resistance before Antire TB∗ troviral Therapy Using the Xpert MTB/RIF Assay: A Prospective Study. PLo S Med 2011;8(7). e 1001067. https://doi. org/10.1371 / ∗Disseminated ¼ involving two or more non-contiguous organs journal. pmed.1001067. concomitantly. 4. Heller T, Wallrauch C, Goblirsch S, et al. Focused assessment with (After Harries, A. D., et al., 2004. and Sharma, S. K., et al., 2005.) sonography for HIV-associated tuberculosis (FASH): a short protocol and a pictorial review. Crit Ultrasound J 2012;4:21. 5. Meintjes G, Stek C, Blumenthal L, et al. Prednisone for the Prevention of Paradoxical Tuberculosis-Associated IRIS. N Engl J Med SUMMARY BOX 2018;379:1915–25. https://doi. org/10.1056 /NEJMoa 1800762. Tuberculosis in HIV-Infected Patients TB and HIV infection are the most important ‘tropical’ diseases in adults in many parts of sub-Saharan Africa. Co-infection with HIV and TB is common and poses a particular challenge to the clinician. Clinical presentation of TB changes with declining peripheral CD 4 counts (Table 33.2).