34 A 35-Year-Old Male Farmer from Peru With a Chronic Ulcer and Multiple Nodular Lesions on the Arm FERNANDO MEJÍA CORDERO, BEATRIZ BUSTAMANTE AND EDUARDO H. GOTUZZO Clinical Presentation History A 35-year-old farmer from the Peruvian highlands presents to a reference hospital in the capital, Lima, with a 2-month history of a slowly growing ulcer and multiple painless nodules on his left arm. Two months before presentation, the patient suffered a scratch on his left hand from a tree branch while working in the fields. After a few days, he noticed a small painless erythematous papule that later developed into a pustule. He took antibiotics without improvement. Over the following weeks new pustules appeared, and the lesion started to ulcerate and increased in size, despite continued antibiotics and topical traditional medicines. Four weeks after the initial lesion near the ulcer. papule the patient noticed painless firm nodules on his left forearm. The patient was seen at a regional hospital and trea- Laboratory Results ted empirically for cutaneous leishmaniasis with a 20-day The WBC is 4.5 109 /L (reference range 4–10 109 /L) course of pentavalent antimonials, but showed no improvewith normal differential count; haemoglobin is 11.3 g/d L ment. He was then referred for further diagnosis and (12–16 g/d L). The remainder of the full blood count is treatment. normal. The patient was previously healthy. He denied recent contact with animals or travel. Questions Clinical Findings 1. What are your differential diagnoses? The patient appears generally well. His vital signs are normal 2. How would you approach this patient? and he is afebrile. On his left hand there is a single ulcerative lesion (20 Discussion 30 mm) with irregular elevated borders ( tiple subcutaneous erythematous nodules (10 10 mm) A Peruvian farmer presents with a chronic ulcerative lesion along the lymphatic tract of the left arm ( of the physical examination is normal. phatic tract compatible with nodular lymphangitis. The 93 --- PAGE BREAK -- 94 Answer to Question 2 How Would You Approach This Patient? The first step is the collection of specimens for microscopy (smears for Gram, Giemsa and Ziehl–Neelsen stains), culture and, if available, PCR for Leishmania and Mycobacterium species and Sporothrix schenckii. Specimens should be collected by scraping of the base of the active ulcer, biopsy of the edge of the lesion, and fine-needle aspiration of one of the lymphatic nodules. If available, a leishmanin skin test would be a useful diagnostic tool. Fungi such as S. schenckii grow on special media and the laboratory should be informed of the clinical suspicion of sporotrichosis. The initial evaluation should also include chest radiography and a PPD skin test to rule out tuberculosis. The Case Continued… The chest x-ray was normal and PPD skin testing was negative. No leishmania parasites were observed by direct microscopy, and the leishmanin skin test was negative. Leishmania culture was not performed. Mycobacterial cultures were negative. However, culture of the ulcer scraping and nodule aspiration were positive for S. schenckii. lesions started after a minor traumatic injury. The patient A diagnosis of lymphocutaneous sporotrichosis was made. denies systemic symptoms. Laboratory examination shows The mild anaemia was likely to be unrelated. The patient was mild anaemia. started on itraconazole PO 200 mg/day. After 8 months of treatment the ulcer and nodular lesions had resolved and Answer to Question 1 the patient was considered to be cured. What Are Your Differential Diagnoses? SUMMARY BOX In Peru, the common differential diagnoses of a chronic ulcer with nodular lymphangitis include cutaneous leishmaniasis, Sporotrichosis sporotrichosis and mycobacterial infection by Mycobacterium tuberculosis or M. marinum. S by po S r . o s tr c ic h h e o n s c i k s ii i , s a a d s i u m b o - r a p c h u ic te f t u o ng ch u r s o w ni i c th fu a ng w a o l r i l n d f w ec id ti e on di c s a tr u ib s u e - d Leishmaniasis is endemic in the Andes between 1000 and tion, existing as a saprophytic mould in soil and plants and as a 3000 m altitude and in the Amazon Basin. The patient’s ori- yeast in tissues. Cutaneous sporotrichosis is the most common gin and clinical presentation are highly suggestive of cutane- form of the disease, which is acquired by inoculation during minor injury by animal bites, plant thorns or other cutting vegeous leishmaniasis. However, the lack of clinical improvement after a complete course of pentavalent antimonials (>80 % tation. Sporotrichosis has in addition emerged as a zoonosis transmitted mainly by infected cats, with epidemic outbreaks in cure rate) makes this diagnosis unlikely. Brazil and some countries in South America, caused by S. Sporotrichosis is the second most important diagnosis to brasiliensis. The upper limbs are most commonly affected. The consider. The patient’s clinical features are typical and the infection is usually limited to the cutaneous, subcutaneous and lymphatic tissues surrounding the injury. The initial papule at the disease is commonly seen in Peru. Another diagnosis to keep inoculation site typically grows slowly into a nodule and then in mind is secondary cutaneous tuberculosis, especially ulcerates. Contiguous lymphatic spread is very common because the patient has likely been exposed to M. tuberculosis (48–92 %) and is referred to as ‘nodular lymphangitis’ or ‘sporduring his lifetime. The patient has no history of exposure to otrichoid lymphangitis’. The majority of cases are sporadic. fresh and saltwater environments to suggest infection with Farmers, veterinarians, rose gardeners and others regularly M. marinum. Nocardiosis (Nocardia brasiliensis) and tularae- engaged in outdoor activities are at highest risk. Persons with mia (Francisella tularensis) are other causes of nodular lym- pre-existing chronic conditions (e. g., alcohol abuse) or immunosuppression (e. g., HIV/AIDS) are at risk of developing pulphangitis but are unlikely in this patient, because monary sporotrichosis after mould inhalation or disseminated nocardiosis is rare and tularaemia has never been reported sporotrichosis after haematogenous spread from the cutaneous in the southern hemisphere. lesion. --- PAGE BREAK -- Further Reading The fungi are scarce in tissues and generally not detected on microscopy. Serology is not useful because of low sensitivity and specificity. Diagnosis is based on isolation of the organism by 1. Hay RJ. Fungal infections In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical culture of the skin biopsy, lesion aspirate, or sputum. Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 [ S. schenckii grows on Saboraud agar at 25 to 27°C. Also, 2. Sanchotene KO, Madrid IM, Klafke GB, Bergamashi M, molecular methods may be used. Terra PPD, Rodrigues AM, Xavier MO. Sporothrix brasiliensis out Spontaneous resolution of the lesions is rare. Itraconazole breaks and the rapid emergence of feline sporotrichosis. Mycoses PO 200 mg/day is considered the drug of choice for cutaneous 2015;58:652–8. sporotrichosis. The treatment should be continued for 2 to 3. Barros MB, de Almeida Paes R, Schubach AO. Sporothrix schenckii 4 weeks after resolution of all lesions, typically 3 to 6 months but sometimes even requiring years. Saturated solution of potas- and sporotrichosis. Clin Microbiol Rev 2011;24(4):633–54. sium iodide, a cheap and effective drug, has also been widely 4. Kauffman CA, Bustamante B, Chapman SW, et al. Clinical practice used but its low tolerability and many unpleasant side effects guidelines for the management of sporotrichosis: 2007 update by the (e. g., salivary gland swelling, metallic taste, rash and fever) limit Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis 2007;45 its use. Terbinafine is also an alternative treatment. Itraconazole (10):1255–65. (200 mg PO bd for 1–2 years) is also the preferred drug for 5. Hay R, Denning DW, Bonifaz A, Queiroz-Telles F, Beer K, pulmonary or osteoarticular sporotrichosis. In severely ill patients Bustamante B. The Diagnosis of Fungal Neglected Tropical Diseases or patients with disseminated disease, initial therapy with (Fungal NTDs)andthe Roleof Investigationand Laboratory Tests:An amphotericin B is recommended, with conversion to oral itra Expert Consensus Report. Trop Med Infect Dis 2019;4(4):E 122. conazole after a favourable response and stabilization. Relapses are infrequent with all forms and therapy, although long-term secondary prophylaxis might be required in patients with HIV/ AIDS.