35 A 32-Year-Old Woman from Malawi With Headache and Blurred Vision CAMILLA ROTHE Clinical Presentation TABLE Laboratory Results on Admission 35.1 History Parameter Patient Reference A 32-year-old Malawian woman presents to a local hospital WBC ( 109 /L) 3.7 4–10 with a 3-week history of headache and blurred vision. The headache has been gradual in onset and does not respond Haemoglobin (g/d L) 10.2 12–16 to over-the-counter painkillers. There is no fever and no his- MCV (f L) 92 80–98 tory of convulsions or of head trauma. Platelets ( 109 /L) 91 150–350 The patient presented to a local health centre where she received presumptive antimalarial treatment (artemether/ Fasting blood glucose (mmol/L) 5.43 5.0–6.7 lumefantrine) and a course of antibiotics (amoxicillin Malaria RDT Negative Negative 500 mg tds for 5 days), which was of no benefit. Clinical Findings Laboratory Results The patient appears wasted and slightly anaemic. All vital See Table 35.1. signs are normal and she is afebrile. The GCS is 15 /15. There is no neck stiffness. The visual acuity is normal on both sides. Questions On left lateral gaze there is an abduction deficit of the left eye with ‘blurring of vision’ reported by the patient ( 1. What are your differential diagnoses? The rest of the examination is normal. 2. What investigations would you like to do? Discussion A Malawian woman presents with a chronic headache and ‘blurred vision’. She is wasted and has a unilateral abducens nerve palsy. She is afebrile and has no neck stiffness. The full blood count shows normocytic anaemia and thrombocytopenia. Answer to Question 1 What Are Your Differential Diagnoses? The patient’s clinical presentation suggests chronic meningitis. The two most important differential diagnoses are cryptococcal meningitis and tuberculous meningitis. Also, partially treated bacterial meningitis is a possibility because she received amoxicillin at the health centre, but the gradual headache. onset of symptoms makes this less likely. 96 --- PAGE BREAK -- Chronic meningitis is commonly associated with immunosuppression. The patient lives in a part of the world with a high HIV prevalence. Her laboratory findings (anaemia and thrombocytopenia) are also common in untreated HIV infection. Even though malaria may present with non-specific symptoms and both thrombocytopenia and anaemia are commonly seen in malaria patients, the absence of fever, the negative rapid diagnostic test (RDT) and the history of taking artemisinin combination therapy make it an unlikely differential diagnosis. Also, malaria usually does not cause cranial nerve palsies. Answer to Question 2 Ink stain). (Source: www. cdc. gov; www. cdc. gov/fungal/cryptococco What Investigations Would You Like to Do? sis-neoformans/) An HIV test is crucial and a lumbar puncture should be done without delay. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) opening pressure should be measured and documented. Routine CSF examination should include India Ink stain and bacterial and fun SUMMARY BOX gal cultures. Cryptococcal antigen (Cr Ag) should be tested in blood and CSF. Cryptococcal Meningitis Cryptococcal meningitis (CM) occurs worldwide. Ninety-five per The Case Continued… cent of CM cases in developing countries are HIV-associated. CM is the most common cause of adult meningitis in sub-Saharan A lumbar puncture was done on admission. The CSF looked Africa and parts of Asia where HIV prevalence is high. clear, but the opening pressure was increased at 50 cm H O Cryptococcal meningitis is caused by the encapsulated (normal: 10–18 cm H O). The CSF results are shown 2 in environmental yeast, Cryptococcus neoformans. It is an oppor 2 tunistic infection, which occurs at advanced stages of immuno A diagnosis of cryptococcal meningitis was made based usually present with a sub-acute headache of several days to upon a positive fungal culture result. India Ink was negative, weeks duration. Other common clinical findings are cranial nerve but sensitivity is only at around 50–70 %. Cr Ag, which is palsies (N VI), confusion and impaired consciousness. Altered >95 % sensitive, was not available. mental state is associated with increased lethality. CM is clinically indistinguishable from tuberculous meningitis (TBM), although The HIV serology came back positive. The CD 4 count fever and neck stiffness are more common in TBM. was very low at 22 /μL. The patient was started on oral flu- CSF opening pressure is often markedly elevated. Further conazole 1200 mg (see Summary Box), because the preferred CSF findings are commonly non-specific, and the CSF may even fungicidal drugs Amphotericin B and flucytosine were not be normal. Diagnosis of CM is made by demonstrating the fungus in the CSF. This is traditionally done by light microscopy after available. India-Ink staining ( She was also started on co-trimoxazole prophylaxis. She and the sensitivity is therefore variable. Detection of Cr Ag e. g. by received repeated therapeutic lumbar punctures until the latex-agglutination test or lateral flow assay (LFA) is better. Fungal headache settled. culture of CSF is required to isolate the organism for antimicrobial Antiretroviral therapy was commenced 4 weeks into her susceptibility testing. CM treatment consists of three phases: induction, consolidation, and maintenance. The gold standard is antifungal treatment. The patient returned to her village an induction therapy with two fungicidal drugs that rapidly yet died 6 weeks later of an unknown cause. decrease the fungal burden in the CSF i. e. combined (liposomal) amphotericin B plus flucytosine (IV or oral) for the initial 2 weeks, followed by oral fluconazole 400 mg daily for at least 8 weeks and fluconazole maintenance therapy 200 mg daily until immune reconstitution. The reality in many resource-limited settings is however TABLE CSF Results on Admission hampered by poor drug availability and therefore commonly dif 35.2 fers from the gold standard. Oral fluconazole is often the only Parameter Patient Reference available drug, thanks to a drug donation programme by the manufacturing company. Fluconazole is only fungistatic, which Leukocytes (cells/μL) 18 0–5 may be effective as a secondary prophylaxis, but is less useful as induction therapy when potent fungicidal drugs are needed to Protein (g/L) 0.8 0.15–0.40 rapidly bring down the fungal burden. Studies in low-income Glucose (mmol/L) 1.97 2.22–3.88 settings have demonstrated that even short courses of Amphotericin B (5–7 days) are preferable to treatment with fluconazole India Ink Negative Negative alone. Flucytosine, the other fungicidal drug, is expensive; and Culture C. neoformans Negative despite its great value in the treatment of CM, remains unlicensed --- PAGE BREAK -- 98 Further Reading in many African and Asian countries. Steroids are of no benefit in the treatment of HIV-associated cryptococcal meningitis. Many patients with CM suffer from severe headaches, which 1. Wood R. Clinical features and management of HIV/AIDS. do not respond to analgesics. The headache is caused by raised In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. intracranial pressure (ICP) and therapeutic lumbar punctures London: Elsevier; 2013 [ (LPs) bring immediate pain relief. LPs may have to be repeated on 2. Perfect JR, Dismukes WE, Dromer F, et al. Clinical practice guidea daily basis until the ICP has come down and sustained pain lines for the management of cryptococcal disease: 2010 update by control has been achieved. the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis 2010;50 HIV-positive patients with CM should start antiretroviral ther- (3):291–322. apy, but the optimum timing is not yet clear. Introduction of ART 3. Sloan DJ, Dedicoat MJ, Lalloo DG. Treatment of cryptococcal 4 to 10 weeks after starting antifungal treatment is currently meningitis in resource limited settings. Curr Opin Infect Dis considered the safest approach. Prognosis of CM in resource-limited settings is poor and 102009;22(5):455–63. week lethality on fluconazole monotherapy may exceed 60 %. 4. Sloan DJ, Parris V. Cryptococcal meningitis: epidemiology and therapeutic options. Clin Epidemiol 2014;6:169–82. 5. Molloy SF, Kanyama C, Heyderman RS, et al. Antifungal Combinations for Treatment of Cryptococcal Meningitis in Africa. N Engl J Med 2018;378:1004–17.