36 A 23-Year-Old Farmer from Myanmar With Unilateral Scrotal Swelling KENTARO ISHIDA AND CAMILLA ROTHE Clinical Presentation History A 23-year-old farmer presents to a district hospital in Myanmar with a 3-year history of left-sided scrotal swelling. The swelling is non-tender and has gradually increased in size. There is no history of fever. He has attempted to treat the swelling with traditional herbal medicine to no avail. The patient comes from the central part of Myanmar. He reports that scrotal swelling is not an uncommon problem in his home region. Clinical Findings The patient is a 23-year-old man in fair general condition. His vital signs are normal and he is afebrile. There is unilat- and non-reducible. eral scrotal swelling, which cannot be reduced ( There are no palpable inguinal lymph nodes. The patient reports that scrotal swelling is common in the region where he comes from. This may suggest a possible Questions infectious aetiology. The most important infectious disease to consider in this patient is lymphatic filariasis (LF) caused 1. What is the differential diagnosis? by Wuchereria bancrofti. Hydrocoele is the most common 2. What investigations would you like to do? clinical abnormality in men with bancroftian filariasis. Also, urogenital schistosomiasis (Schistosoma haemato Discussion bium) may lead to unilateral scrotal swelling, but it is not endemic in South-east Asia. Testicular tuberculosis is A young Burmese farmer presents with progressive unilateral another infectious disease that may manifest with scrotal scrotal swelling. On examination, the swelling is non-tender swelling. However, the long duration of the swelling in and non-reducible. He does not have any other symptoms the absence of other signs and symptoms make this unlikely, or signs. and it would not explain the large number of cases seen in his Answer Question 1 home region. What is Differential Diagnosis? Answer Question 2 The most common differentials to consider in a chronic, What Investigations Would You Like to Do? non-tender, unilateral scrotal swelling are inguinal hernia and hydrocoele. A testicular tumour also needs to be taken Ultrasound can help distinguish a testicular tumour from a into consideration. Unlike hydrocoeles, hernias can often hydrocoele or hernia. Also, in case of lymphatic filariasis, be manually reduced. Hydrocoeles may be verified by trans- adult worms may be seen on scrotal ultrasonography (“filarial illumination with a penlight. dance sign”). 99 --- PAGE BREAK -- 100 The traditional diagnostic gold standard for lymphatic Direct Effect of Most Commonly Used Drugs filariasis is the proof of microfilariae in the blood. Samples TABLE on Different Stages of W. bancrofti and 36.1 should be collected when microfilaraemia is highest. For the Brugia species majority of filarial species, this is between 9 PM and 3 AM Microfilariae Adults because of the nocturnal biting activities of most vectors. Microfilarial PCR assays have a sensitivity and specificity Diethylcarbamazine (DEC) ++ + comparable to microscopy with an experienced microsco Ivermectin ++ pist, but are usually not available in a district hospital setting. Albendazole + Circulating filarial antigen (CFA) tests detect antigens Doxycycline ++ released by adult W. bancrofti. They are available as immu++ ¼ most eliminated; + ¼ few/some eliminated; ¼no effect. nochromatographic card tests and can use finger-prick blood. Because there is no periodicity of adult-worm antigens, CFA tests can be taken at any time. Their sensitivity and specificity are high. CFA tests are also the preferred method for diag- The most advanced stage of chronic lymphoedema (stage III) is also referred to as ‘elephantiasis’. Chronic ulceration with nosis and treatment monitoring of bancroftian filariasis bacterial and fungal superinfection is a common problem. within national control programmes. Antifilarial antibody Moreover, in areas of high HIV prevalence, lymphatic filaritesting lacks specificity and is of limited value. asis was found to increase susceptibility to HIV infection by inducing systemic CD 4 T-cell activation. Drugs used for treatment and control of lymphatic filariasis The Case Continued… include diethylcarbamazine (DEC), ivermectin, albendazole and doxycycline. Hydrocoele was confirmed on ultrasound. The patient Albendazole 400 mg STAT with either DEC (6 mg/kg) or underwent hydrocoelectomy, and 3 litres of clear fluid could ivermectin (200 μg/kg) reduces microfilaraemia to very low be drained during the operation. He also received antifilarial levels (Table 36.1). A triple therapy combining all three drugs treatment. He lived in a remote area and was lost to follow- appears even more efficacious. However, DEC should not be given in areas co-endemic for up afterwards. onchocerciasis or loiasis because of potentially severe side effects, and care must be taken to administer ivermectin in SUMMARY BOX areas with Loa loa co-endemicity. Treatment in mass drug administration (MDA) programmes Lymphatic Filariasis is recommended annually; whereas individual patients should get treatment every 6 months until microfilariae and CFA tests LF is caused by filarial nematodes (W. bancrofti, Brugia malayi are negative, or life-long, if transmission goes on. and B. timori). LF is transmitted by a variety of mosquito species. Doxycycline kills endosymbiotic Wolbachia bacteria, which It is endemic in South and South-east Asia, sub-Saharan Africa adult worms require for viability and reproduction. Several and parts of South America and the Caribbean. Around 68 weeks of treatment are required, and doxycycline is contrainmillion people worldwide are estimated to be infected with filarial dicated in pregnancy and in children under the age of 8 years, parasites; an additional 20 million are suffering from chronic which make it an unsuitable option for mass treatment. Its role morbidity. may be in individual treatment of LF patients who lack any of the Lymphatic filariasis is a result of chronic, repeat exposure to contraindications. filarial nematodes. It is therefore not a problem relevant for short For management of lymphoedema, meticulous hygiene is term travellers to endemic regions. crucial, such as daily washing with water and soap and careful Adult worms reside in the lymphatic vessels of the human drying of the affected limb. Bacterial and fungal infections host. They shed microfilariae which are ingested by female should be treated early. Specialized shoes should be worn to mosquitoes during blood-meals. prevent injury if the lower limbs are affected. Integration of The most common features of bancroftian filariasis are lymphoedema care and leprosy or diabetic foot care prohydrocoele, acute adenolymphangitis (ADLA) and grammes are being promoted. lymphoedema. Small hydrocoeles sometimes regress after anthelmintic Hydrocoele results from the accumulation of fluid in the treatment. Large hydrocoeles require surgery. tunica vaginalis surrounding the testes. Most cases are unilateral. In endemic areas, hydrocoeles start to develop in early adulthood. Prevalence rates rise steadily with age. Rupture of dilated abdominal lymphatic vessels into the urinary tract may lead to chyluria. Brugian filariasis is milder than infection with W. bancrofti, and urogenital complica Further Reading tions do not occur. Acute ADLA occurs in episodic events that start with fever, chills and severe malaise. Regional lymph nodes are tender and 1. Simonsen P, Fischer PU, Hoerauf A, et al. The Filariases. enlarged, the affected limb may become swollen and hot and the In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. skin may peel off. Repeated episodes of ADLA can lead to London: Elsevier; 2013 [ lymphoedema. 2. Taylor MJ, Hoerauf A, Bockarie M. Lymphatic filariasis and Chronic lymphoedema most commonly affects the lower leg, onchocerciasis. Lancet 2010;376(9747):1175–85. but may also involve the arms, breasts and genitals, as shown in 3. WHO. Lymphoedema and the chronic wound. The role of comthis case. pression and other interventions. In: Macdonald JM, Geyer MJ, --- PAGE BREAK -- editors. Wound and Lymphoedema Management. Geneva: World 5. Kroidl I, Saathoff E, Maganga L, et al. Effect of Wuchereria ban Health Organization; 2010. p. 1–136. crofti infection on HIV-incidence in southwest Tanzania: a pro 4. Thomsen EK, Sanuku N, Baea M, et al. Efficacy, safety and phar- spective cohort study. Lancet 2016;388:1912–20. macokinetics of co-administered diethylcarbamazine, albendazole and ivermectin for treatment of Bancroftian filariasis. Clin Inf Dis 2016;62(3):334–41.