37 A 29-Year-Old Woman from Malawi With Confusion, Diarrhoea and a Skin Rash CAMILLA ROTHE Clinical Presentation History A 29-year-old woman is brought to a hospital in Malawi by her relatives. She has been confused, restless and irritable for the past month. She also has watery diarrhoea, which started 1 week ago. She does not have a fever. It is January, which is the rainy season in Malawi. Her past medical history has been uneventful. There have been no psychiatric disorders in the past. Her HIV status is unknown. She is not taking any medication. There are no known intoxications, no use of alcohol or recreational drugs. The patient is married with four children. She is a housewife. Her husband works as a farmhand on a local chicken farm. They live in a grass-thatched mud-hut and collect their water from a borehole. There is no electricity at home. They eat two meals a day, mainly maize porridge with a few vegetables. Only rarely can the family afford fish or meat. Clinical Findings The patient is slim but not wasted. Glasgow Coma Scale 14 / 15 (confusion), the remaining vital signs are normal and she is afebrile. There is no neck stiffness. The conjunctivae are pale. There is a noticeable skin rash around the patient’s neck ( where the skin appears hyperpigmented and dry. The skin changes are clearly demarcated. The rest of the physical examination is unremarkable. When asked, her relatives report that the rash had been present for the past 2 months. Questions 1. What is the suspected diagnosis and what are your differential diagnoses? 2. How would you manage this patient? appears dry and scaly. 102 --- PAGE BREAK -- Discussion supplementation. In β-thalassaemia the so-called Mentzer index (MCV [f L] : Erythrocyte count [ 1012 /L]) is typically A young Malawian woman presents during the rainy season below 13; in iron deficiency it is above 13. with a 1-month history of confusion, acute watery diarrhoea Intestinal helminth infection can contribute to anaemia. and a rash that mainly seems to affect the sun-exposed areas Because reliable stool microscopy may not be feasible in a of the skin. The family appear to be poor villagers; they live resource-constrained setting, pragmatic anthelmintic treaton an imbalanced diet. ment appears justifiable. Vitamin B (niacin) should be sup 3 plemented and it should be evaluated how the family’s diet Answer to Question 1 could be improved despite their poor socioeconomic circum What is the Suspected Diagnosis and What Are stances. A simple affordable trick is to advise the patient to Your Differential Diagnoses? eat some of the maize directly from the cob, because it is the husks that harbour tryptophan and that go lost during The patient presents with a triad of neuropsychiatric changes, preparation of white maize flour. watery diarrhoea and a photosensitive dermatitis. This clinical triad – diarrhoea, dermatitis, dementia – is typical of pellagra It is a slight irony in this case that the husband is working on a local chicken farm and still cannot afford a balanced diet (vitamin B deficiency). The rainy season, during which the 3 that includes eggs and poultry for his family. patient presents, is not only the peak of malaria transmission but is also the ‘hungry season’. Stocks have been consumed, the new crop is not ready for harvesting yet and in poor, rural areas large parts of the population go hungry. The Case Continued… A combination of confusion, diarrhoea and skin changes The HIV test came back negative. The full blood count in a sub-Saharan African setting should also prompt any clishowed a microcytic anaemia with a haemoglobin of 6.7 g/ nician to rule out HIV infection. Persistent confusion in the d L and a Mentzer index >13. The patient received an approcontext of HIV is commonly seen in tuberculous meningitis, priate dose of vitamin B-complex, iron and folic acid supplecryptococcal meningitis and progressive multifocal leukoenmentation and a single dose of albendazole. Her confusion cephalopathy (PML), or may be caused by the human settled within a week and the diarrhoea stopped. The patient immunodeficiency virus (HIV-associated neurocognitive and her family received dietary counselling. She was predisorder). Both diarrhoea and skin changes of various aetiolscribed soothing applications for her skin lesions and was ogies commonly occur in HIV infection. told to avoid sun exposure. She was discharged and asked A further differential diagnosis to consider in a patient to come back at 3 months for an outpatient follow-up visit with photosensitive dermatitis, anaemia and neuropsychiatincluding a repeat full blood count. ric changes is systemic lupus erythematosus. SUMMARY BOX Answer to Question 2 How Would You Manage This Patient? Pellagra Even though the clinical presentation is very typical of pel- Pellagra is a nutritional disorder caused by the deficiency of lagra, other differential diagnoses should actively be ruled vitamin B 3 or its precursor, the essential amino-acid tryptophan. ‘Pellagra’ is derived from the Italian pelle agra, meaning ‘rough out: A diagnostic HIV test should be carried out. The fact skin’. It continues to be a problem in central and southern Africa that the patient is currently unable to receive counselling where maize is the main staple food. Maize is poor in tryptophan, and give her consent should not lead to a delay of testing which is required for niacin synthesis. In some parts of Africa white because its result determines immediate further manage- maize is mainly consumed, which is nutritionally poorer than the ment. Once confusion has settled, the HIV test should be yellow maize used in this region as animal feed. Milling maize and removing its husks further deprives it of nutritious components. In repeated to include a pre- and post-counselling session. In many poor African countries with little crop diversity, diet may case of a reactive HIV serology, a lumbar puncture should literally consist of just maize, whereas niacin-containing food be done to rule out tuberculous or cryptococcal meningitis. items such as fresh fruits, vegetables, peanuts, fish, meat, milk A full blood count would help assess the cause of the and eggs are not affordable. Most nutritional disorders peak patient’s clinical anaemia. If normocytic anaemia is found, during the rainy season, including kwashiorkor and marasmus in children. Apart from a poor diet, pellagra may be caused by creatinine should be checked, because chronic kidney disease malabsorption, alcoholism, antituberculous treatment and other is very commonly seen in the tropics. Patients often present aetiologies. The roll-out of INH-preventive therapy (IPT) for HIV late, and both confusion and dermatitis can be signs of patients has led to an increase in pellagra cases in some areas in uraemia. Africa. Single cases of pellagra continue to be described from all In case of a microcytic, hypochromic anaemia patients over the world. Patients present with the three ‘Ds’ of dermatitis, diarrhoea should be treated with iron and possibly also receive folic acid and dementia. The dermatitis often presents in a typical shape substitution, because a poor diet usually is not limited to just around the neck, which is referred to as ‘Casal’s necklace’ after one nutritional component. β-thalassaemia, commonly seen the Spanish physician who first described it in poor peasants in in tropical countries, also presents with microcytic anaemia the 18 th century. The skin tends to be dry, tender to touch and and should be considered if there is no response to iron exposure to sunlight may be very painful. --- PAGE BREAK -- 104 ‘Dementia’ stands for a large spectrum of possible neuropsychiatric symptoms including anxiety, depression, hallucinations, ataxia and spastic paraparesis. A fourth ‘D’, death, occurs if pellagra is left untreated. The diagnosis is made clinically. Treatment is with niacin or nicotinamide. Recommended doses in adults range from 50 to 400 mg daily in the acute phase. In severe cases, doses of up to 1000 mg IV per day have been recommended. Once acute symptoms have settled, continuation treatment is with 50 to 150 mg niacin daily for 2 weeks. Therapy should also include other B vitamins, zinc, magnesium and a diet rich in calories. Skin lesions should be covered with soothing applications and the patient should avoid sun exposure until the lesions have resolved. Patients and their families require intense dietary counselling on how to improve their diet despite socioeconomic challenges. Further Reading 1. Abrams S, Brabin BJ, Coulter JBS. Nutrition-associated disease. In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 [ 2. Hegyi J, Schwartz RA, Hegyi V. Pellagra: dermatitis, dementia, and diarrhea. Int J Dermatol 2004;43(1):1–5. 3. Matapandeu G, Dunn SH, Pagels P. An outbreak of Pellagra in the Kasese Catchment Area, Dowa. Malawi Am J Trop Med 2017;96 (5):1244–7. 4. Kipsang JK, Chogea JK, Marindac PA, et al. Pellagra in isoniazid preventive and antiretroviral therapy. ID Cases 2019;17:e 00550. 5. Narasimha VL, Ganesh S, Reddy S, Shukla L, Mukherjee D, Kandasamy A, Chand PK, Benegal V, Murthy P. Pellagra and alcohol dependence syndrome: findings from a tertiary care addiction treatment centre in India. Alcohol Alcohol 2019;54(2):148–51.