38 A 24-Year-Old Female Globetrotter With Strange Sensations in the Right Side of Her Body JURI KATCHANOV AND EBERHARD SIEBERT Laboratory Results Clinical Presentation Her routine blood investigations, including differential History blood count and C-reactive protein are completely normal. A 24-year-old Dutch yoga instructor presents to an emer- Her CSF examination is unremarkable. gency room in Berlin, Germany, with one episode of strange sensations in the right side of her body. This started in the Imaging right side of her face, marched to her right arm and then con The MRI of her brain with gadolinium enhancement shows tinued to involve her right leg. She describes the feeling as ‘pins and needles’ lasting for about 2 minutes. She had a sim- multiple cortical and subcortical cystic lesions in both hemispheres ( ilar episode several months ago. At that time, she did not consult a doctor. Four years before this presentation, after finishing school, Questions she had left her home town in The Netherlands to go backpacking for 2 years. She travelled extensively through South 1. What is the clinical syndrome the patient presents with America (Ecuador, Peru, Argentina) and South-east Asia and what is the most likely diagnosis in light of the imag (Thailand, Laos, Cambodia), staying in hostels or private ing findings and the patient’s travel history? accommodations. She describes herself as an ‘eco-traveller’, 2. How would you treat this patient? visiting the countryside and staying with local people. She has been a strict vegan for the past 8 years. She would eat Discussion food from local vendors but never any animal products. Her main diet during her travelling consisted of fruits, veg- A young Dutch woman presents with paraesthesias that spread etables, nuts and rice. over the right side of her body, lasting for about 2 minutes. Four years previously she went on an extensive backpacking trip around the world, visiting various places in South America Clinical Findings and Asia. She lives on a vegan diet. Her physical examination including her neurological status are completely normal. The On examination she looks well and is afebrile. Her neurolog- basic blood and CSF results are normal and do not reveal any ical examination is completely unremarkable. The rest of her signs of inflammation. The MRI of the brain shows multiple physical examination is also normal. cystic lesions in both hemispheres. 105 --- PAGE BREAK -- 106 and contrast-enhanced T 1-weighted (D) images show multiple CSF isointense (cystic) lesions containing a scolex (central dot) in cortical and subcortical distribution. Some lesions show perifocal oedema and ring-enhancement after contrast administration (D). Answer to Question 1 Answer to Question 2 What is the Clinical Syndrome? How Would You Treat This Patient? The patient presents with a focal epileptic seizure. Her The patient should receive antiparasitic treatment, corticoparaesthesias represent a so-called Jacksonian ‘sensory steroids and antiepileptic drugs (see Summary Box and march’. Neuroimaging reveals multiple cortical and sub- Table 38.1). cortical lesions. The cortical lesions in the left hemisphere are likely to be responsible for the patient’s epileptic dis- The Case Continued… order on the contralateral side of her body. The lesions are cystic, some of them show gadolinium The EITB came back positive for serum and CSF and a diagenhancement of the wall and surrounding oedema. Given nosis of neurocysticercosis was made. the presentation (healthy-looking patient, no immunosup- The patient was treated with albendazole 400 mg bd pig pression, no fever, one similar episode a while ago with no faeces which contain for 10 days and started on antiepileptic progression of symptoms) and her travel history to South drugs. She declined treatment with steroids. She did not America and South-east Asia the most likely diagnosis is neu- attend her 3-month follow-up but returned as an outpatient rocysticercosis with multiple cysts in the vesicular and colloi- 1 year later. She had remained seizure-free for 1 year. MRI of dal stage. An enzyme-linked immunoelectrotransfer blot the brain showed regression of all cysts. A CT scan on 2-year (EITB) for the detection of anticysticercal antibodies in follow-up showed two calcifications. Her antiepileptic treatserum and CSF should be done to confirm the diagnosis. ment was stopped after a seizure-free period of 3 years. --- PAGE BREAK -- TABLE Stages of Cysticercal Cyst and Treatment Recommendations 4 38.1 Neuroimaging Stage Biology Anticysticercal Treatment Isointense/isodense to CSF, no contrast Vesicular Viable, non-immunogenic, can 1–2 Albendazole∗ + steroids for enhancement persist asymptomatically for years cysts 10–14 days Enhanced wall (‘ring enhancement’) on Colloidal Viable but degenerating, >2 Albendazole∗ + Praziquantel∗ contrast imaging, surrounding oedema immunogenic cysts + steroids for 10–14 days Thickened retracted cyst without oedema Granulo- Degenerated No anthelmintic treatment nodular Calcification Calcified Final involuted stage ∗diffuse cerebral oedema is a contraindication for antihelminthic treatment In patients with untreated hydrocephalus or diffuse cerebral oedema, management of elevated intracranial pressure alone SUMMARY BOX without antiparasitic treatment is recommended. The management of patients with diffuse cerebral oedema should be antiinflammatory therapy with corticosteroids; hydrocephalus usually Neurocysticercosis requires a surgical approach. Neurocysticercosis is a CNS infestation with the larval form of The duration of antiepileptic therapy depends on the course of Taenia solium (the pork tapeworm). It is widely prevalent in Africa, the disease. Radiological follow-ups at 6-month intervals are Asia and Latin America and is considered by the WHO to be the recommended. If the patient has remained seizure-free for 24 most common preventable cause of epilepsy in the consecutive months with cysts resolved on neuroimaging, antideveloping world. epileptic drugs may be tapered off and then stopped. Humans acquire neurocysticercosis by eating food, e. g. salad or vegetables, contaminated with T. solium eggs. This explains Further Reading why even individuals who do not eat pork meat for religious or ideological reasons can get neurocysticercosis, as seen in this case. (Consuming infested pork meat leads to intestinal 1. Heckmann JE, Bhigjee AI. Tropical neurology. In: Farrar J, editor. infection with adult pork tapeworm). Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 Consumed ova release oncospheres that penetrate the [ intestinal wall to spread haematogenously throughout the host’s 2. Baily G, Garcia HH. Other cestode infections: intestinal cestodes, body. In the CNS they become encysted affecting either the CNS cysticercosis, other larval cestode infections. In: Farrar J, editor. parenchyma or, less commonly, the subarachnoid space. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 Symptoms and signs depend on the location of cysts. The [ most common clinical presentation is focal epileptic seizures. 3. Garcia HH: Neurocysticercosis. Neurol Clin 2018;36(4):851–4. Cysts in the subarachnoid space can cause hydrocephalus, producing headache and altered mental state. Diagnosis is based 4. Coyle CM. Neurocysticerosis: an individualized approach. Infect on neuroimaging, serology and epidemiological evidence. Dis Clin North Am 2019;33(1):153–68. https://doi. org/ Only vesicular and colloidal cysts are amenable to anthelmintic 10.1016 /j. idc.2018.10.007. treatment (Table 38.1). Albendazole or the combination of 5. White Jr. AC, Coyle CM, Rajshekhar V, et al. Diagnosis and albendazole and praziquantel can decrease the number of active treatment of neurocysticercosis: 2017 Clinical Practice Guidelines lesions and reduce long-term seizure frequency. Adjunctive by the Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) and the corticosteroid therapy before antiparasitic drugs is recommended American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene (ASTMH). for all patients treated with anthelmintic drugs. Clin Infect Dis 2018;66(8):1159–63.