42 A 41-Year-Old Male Traveller Returning from Australia With Itchy Eruptions on His Thighs CAMILLA ROTHE Clinical Presentation Questions History 1. What is the clinical syndrome and what is the differential diagnosis? A 41-year-old male yoga teacher presents to a travel clinic in 2. What management would you recommend? Europe because of itchy skin eruptions on both upper thighs for the past week. Discussion He has just returned from a 10-day trip to northern Australia where he attended a yoga seminar. On his way to Aus A 41-year-old European man presents to a travel clinic with tralia he had stopped over on a Thai island for a 3-day beach itchy serpiginous skin lesions. He has recently returned from holiday. Just after his arrival in Australia he developed three a trip to Asia and Australia. intensely itchy skin eruptions on both upper thighs. The itch is so intense that at times it keeps him awake at night. Answer to Question 1 There has been no fever, no cough or wheeze and he is otherwise completely well. What is the Clinical Syndrome and What is the Differential Diagnosis? Clinical Findings The clinical syndrome is a creeping eruption. A creeping eruption is defined as a linear or serpiginous, slightly ele On both upper thighs there are a total of three reddish, ser- vated, erythematous track that moves forward in an irregular piginous tracks, about 2 mm in width ( nal lymph nodes are not enlarged. The chest is clear. The rest in returned travellers is cutaneous larva migrans (CLM) of the examination is unremarkable. caused by larvae of animal hookworms. Creeping eruptions can also result from infection with larvae of Strongyloides stercoralis (larva currens, i. e. running larva), but this can easily be distinguished from CLM. S. stercoralis larvae move several centimetres an hour, that is considerably faster than larvae in cutaneous larva migrans. The eruptions in larva currens persist only for a few hours, whereby in CLM the track may stay for weeks. Creeping eruptions can also be caused by adult nematodes such as Gnathostoma species and trematodes (Fasciola species). The larvae of parasitic flies have also been shown to cause creeping eruptions (migratory myiasis). However, cutaneous larva migrans caused by zoonotic hookworms is by far the commonest cause of creeping eruption seen in travel clinics worldwide. The patient was prob intense itching. exercises in the sand. 116 --- PAGE BREAK -- Answer to Question 2 species, but usually itching starts shortly after larval entry, and the What Management Would You Recommend? elevated track appears 1 to 5 days later. The skin eruptions are most commonly found on the feet but The diagnosis of cutaneous larva migrans can be established clinically, supported by the patient’s travel history. There are may occur in any part of the body that came into contact with infested sand or soil. The itching is intense and may prevent no other investigations required. Antiparasitic treatment can affected people from sleeping. Very rarely, animal hookworms be administered topically or systemically (see Summary Box). may invade the human body leading to pulmonary eosinophilia. Diagnosis is made clinically, supported by exposure history. Skin biopsy is not helpful because the larva is invariably in The Case Continued… advance of its track. There are no reliable serological tests available, and blood eosinophilia is present in a minority of cases. The patient was prescribed a single-dose treatment of iver- The treatment of choice is ivermectin (200μg/kg for 1-2 days.). mectin (200 μg/kg). The itchy eruptions settled within a Albendazole is a good alternative when ivermectin is contraindifew days of taking the drug. cated or not available. Albendazole 400 mg should be given twice daily (bd) for 3 days. Topical thiabendazole 10–15 % tds for 5 to SUMMARY BOX 10 days is also effective but requires more compliance and can be difficult in multiple lesions. Without treatment the lesion can persist for several months, Hookworm-Related Cutaneous Larva Migrans and scratching may lead to bacterial superinfection, particularly if CLM is a creeping eruption resulting from accidental infestation of hygiene is poor. the human skin by larvae of dog and cat hookworms For prevention at the community level, cats and dogs should (Ancylostoma caninum, A. braziliense and Uncinaria stenoce- be dewormed and banned from beaches and playgrounds. In phala). It is one of the most common dermatoses in returning resource-limited settings this is usually not feasible. Individual travellers from tropical destinations. Apart from its relevance in protection can be achieved by wearing appropriate footwear travel medicine, it is endemic in resource-poor communities in the when walking on sand or soil in the tropics and using a sunchair developing world, particularly in Central and South America, the on the beach because towels may be covered with sand and Caribbean and South and South-east Asia. therefore do not protect sufficiently. CLM occurs in most warm and humid climates and where stray dogs and cats are common, or pets are not treated regularly Further Reading with anthelmintics. The animals pass hookworm ova with their stools, and the larval stages develop in sand or soil. CLM is usually acquired when walking barefoot, or sitting or lying on faecally 1. Brooker S, Bundy DAP. Soil-transmitted helminths (geohelcontaminated ground. minths). In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropcial Diseases. 23 rd Animal hookworm larvae enter the epidermis but are unable to ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 [ cross the basement membrane and enter the human body. 2. Vega-Lopez F, Ritchie S. Dermatological problems. In: Farrar J, Confined to the skin, they are unable to complete their lifecycle as editor. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; they would do in their animal host. 2013 [ There usually is a pruritic papule at the site of larval entry. 3. Heukelbach J, Feldmeier H. Epidemiological and clinical character A raised erythematous track starts progressing in an irregular istics of hookworm-related cutaneous larva migrans. Lancet Infect fashion. The onset of symptoms and the speed by which the Dis 2008;8(5):302–9. creeping eruption progresses vary between different hookworm