43 A 35-Year-Old Malawian Woman With a Painful Ocular Tumour MARKUS SCHULZE SCHWERING Answer to Question 1 Clinical Presentation What is the Suspected Diagnosis? History The lesion most likely is an advanced ocular surface squa A 35-year-old woman from Malawi presents to the outpa- mous neoplasia (OSSN). OSSN are commonly seen in tient department of a local tertiary hospital. She was referred HIV-positive individuals in sub-Saharan Africa. They start by an ophthalmic clinical officer from a district hospital for as discrete whitish conjunctival lesions ( exenteration of the left eye because of an ocular tumour. may develop into large tumours if left untreated. Early stages The first symptoms started 8 months prior when she may be confused with pterygium, with an amelanotic naevus, noticed a whitish lesion growing on the conjunctiva of her or a lipoma. Malignant lesions such as amelanotic melanoleft eye. She presented at a health centre and was prescribed mas, lymphomas or adenocarcinomas may look similar non- specified eye drops. Yet, over the following months the as well. lesion grew bigger and turned reddish. She went to a tradi- Answer to Question 2 tional healer who prescribed herbal eye drops, which did not How Would You Manage this Patient? help either. The lesion grew constantly bigger and she finally lost her eyesight in the affected eye. Pain also increased which The patient should be started on analgesic treatment with made her present at her local district hospital. nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs. She should be coun The patient is known to be HIV-positive. She has been on selled and booked for surgery. An extended exenteration of antiretroviral treatment for the past 3 years. The CD 4 count is unknown. Clinical Findings Localized swelling of the left eyeball and orbit, lid closure incomplete ( is 6 /6, whereas the left eye has no light perception. Her left preauricular lymph nodes are swollen. She is afebrile and the rest of her physical examination is unremarkable. Questions 1. What is the suspected diagnosis? 2. How would you manage the patient? Discussion An HIV-positive Malawian woman presents with a painful tumour of her left eye. It started as a whitish lesion on her conjunctiva several months ago. The lesion continued to grow and the affected eye eventually turned blind. with tetracycline eye ointment. 118 --- PAGE BREAK -- tropics and should not be missed during routine clinical examination. (Courtesy Nicholas A. V. Beare). the left eyeball and orbit should be done. Control of the intraocular involvement. HIV infection, ultraviolet radiation (UV) patient’s HIV infection is crucial, and her HIV viral load and human papilloma virus (HPV) are strongly associated with should be checked. OSSN. These factors, together with vitamin A deficiency, weaken Because the patient has lost her eyesight on the left side, the tumour surveillance system and allow DNA-damaged cells to proliferate into tumours. A five- to tenfold increase in incidence the right eye should be carefully examined for possible has been observed in parallel with the HIV epidemic. The current growth of another OSSN that could be removed at an early incidence of OSSN in sub-Saharan Africa is estimated to be 2.2 stage. A fundoscopy should be performed in order to detect per 100 000, and it continues to rise (USA: 0.3 per 100 000). By any abnormalities, especially an upcoming cytomegalovirus which mechanism HIV infection favours development of OSSN is infection. as yet unknown. Co-infection with human papilloma virus (HPV) has been implicated in the aetiology of OSSN, but the virus could only be detected in less than half of cases. The Case Continued… OSSN typically presents as a greyish, elevated, gelatinous mass surrounded by engorged conjunctival vessels. There is no The patient was admitted to the hospital and counselled sev- explanation why the disease is mostly unilateral. It often starts to eral times about the need for surgery. Yet she refused surgical develop at the nasal side of the eye and spreads to involve the whole conjunctiva, lids, local tissue and lymph nodes. In the intervention and was only willing to accept conservative developing world, patients often present late with sometimes treatment. disfiguring lesions. There is a trend towards treating conjunctival The patient’s left orbit was covered with antibiotics and lesions suspected to be OSSN based on clinical impression. bandaged. When pain was sufficiently controlled, the patient However, clinical diagnosis by slit lamp – with or without goniowas discharged with the offer to come back at any time. scopy – is difficult because of the overlap in clinical features of OSSN and non–OSSN lesions. Toluidine blue 0.05 % vital staining She was asked to report to her antiretroviral therapy is a good screening tool. Negative staining results indicate that (ART) clinic for control of the viral load and possible switch OSSN is relatively unlikely. It does, however, not replace surgical of her antiretroviral therapy. biopsy with histopathological examination. Early, non-invasive stages of OSSN can be treated with topical SUMMARY BOX chemotherapeutic agents such as topical 5-flurouracil and mitomycin or subconjunctival interferon-α2 b. Primary treatment is Ocular Surface Squamous Neoplasia surgical excision. Inexpensive use of fluorouracil 1 % eyedrops for 4 weeks substantially reduces the risk of recurrence. It is a low OSSN are commonly seen in HIV-positive individuals in tropical cost option listed on the WHO’s Essential Drug List. In more countries. Early diagnosis is crucial for successful treatment, and advanced disease, surgery may have to involve enucleation of the any clinician working in a tropical region with high HIV prevalence eye or exenteration of the orbit. Adjuvant treatment can decrease should be able to recognize an OSSN. recurrence rate, which after simple excision is high (30 %–40 %). The term OSSN is used to describe dysplastic lesions of Possibilities for adjunctive treatment include topical chemotherconjunctiva and cornea ranging from conjunctival intraepithelial apy, cryotherapy and intraoperative β-irradiation. Diagnosis of neoplasia (CIN) to invasive squamous cell carcinoma of the OSSN in an HIV-unknown individual should prompt the clinician conjunctiva (SCCC). The use of ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) to perform an HIV test. Because HIV seems to play a role in in OSSN may help detect intraocular invasion. Prominent nodular tumour development, HIV-reactive patients with OSSN should tumours >5 mm thick can also be taken as risk factors for receive effective ART to achieve virological control. --- PAGE BREAK -- 120 Further Reading 4. Gichuhi S, Sagoo MS, Weiss HA, Burton MJ. Epidemiology of ocular surface squamous neoplasia in Africa. Trop Med Int Health 1. Beare NV, Bestawrous A. Ophthalmology in the tropics and sup- 2013;18(12):1424–43. tropics. In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed 5. Gichuhi S, Macharia E, Kabiru J, et al. Topical fluorouracil after London: Elsevier; 2013. surgery for ocular surface squamous neoplasia in Kenya: a rando 2. Tiong T, Borooah S, Msosa J, et al. Clinicopathological review of mised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet Glob Health ocular surface squamous neoplasia in Malawi. Br J Ophthalmol 2016;4(6):e 378–85. 2013;97(8):961–4. 3. Meel R, Dhiman R, Sen S, et al. Ocular surface squamous neoplasia with intraocular extension: Clinical and Ultrasound Biomicroscopic Findings. Ocul Oncol Pathol 2019;5(2):122–7.