44 A 7-Year-Old Girl from South Sudan With Undulating Fever KAREN ROODNAT AND KOERT RITMEIJER Clinical Presentation TABLE Laboratory Results on Admission 44.1 History Parameter Patient Reference A 7-year-old girl is presented at a clinic in South Sudan with a 4-week history of undulating fever. The fever occurs mainly WBC ( 109 /L) 1.35 4–10 in the afternoon hours accompanied by chills and sometimes Haemoglobin (g/d L) 6.8 12–16 convulsions. Between the febrile episodes she was initially Platelets ( 109 /L) 98 150–300 fine and played normally. However, over time she has developed progressive anorexia, dry cough, chest pain, joint and back pain. Discussion She has never been admitted to a hospital, but she has presented at another clinic recently where she received some In South Sudan, a young girl presents with a 4-week history unspecified tablets that did not bring any improvement. of fever, progressive anorexia, general body pains and a dry cough. On examination she is pale and severely malnour Clinical Findings ished. She has splenomegaly and generalized lymphadenopathy. The full blood count (FBC) shows pancytopenia. The girl is alert and pale, but not jaundiced. She is severely Serological rapid diagnostic tests for malaria, brucellosis malnourished (Z-score <3). Her vital signs are: temperature and visceral leishmaniasis are negative. 39.6°C (103.3°F), pulse 96 bpm, blood pressure 100 / 60 mm Hg. Her chest sounds clear; normal heart sounds; soft Answer to Question 1 abdomen with a splenomegaly of 4 cm below the left costal What Are Your Most Important Differential margin. There are multiple enlarged lymph nodes of about Diagnoses? 1 cm in diameter in the cervical, axillary, inguinal and epitrochlear region. There are no skin lesions and no peripheral Chronic fever, splenomegaly and wasting in a child from oedema. South Sudan should raise the suspicion of visceral leishmaniasis or brucellosis. Tuberculosis and HIV infection both need to be ruled out, because they can cause chronic fever, Laboratory Results anorexia, weight loss, splenomegaly and generalized The patient’s blood test results are shown in Table 44.1. lymphadenopathy. Plasmodium falciparum rapid diagnostic test (RDT) and a Malaria can cause fever, anaemia and splenomegaly, but blood film for malaria parasites are negative. Brucella species two different negative tests make this unlikely. In addition, serology (Ig G and Ig M) is negative. Visceral leishmaniasis: the chronic fever is unusual; in a child one might expect a r K 39-antibody RDT is negative. more acute course. Furthermore, malaria does not cause any lymphadenopathy. Hyperreactive malarial splenomegaly Questions syndrome (HMS) has been described in children. It can cause gross splenomegaly and anaemia in regions hyperen 1. What are your most important differential diagnoses? demic for malaria, but HMS does not present with a fever, 2. How would you approach this patient? neither is lymphadenopathy part of the picture. 121 --- PAGE BREAK -- 122 The Case Continued… Typhoid fever can present with persistent fever and splenomegaly; a dry cough is also common. The duration The mother of the patient reported that the family came of fever in this case may be slightly too long though, and genfrom an area where visceral leishmaniasis was known. It eralized lymphadenopathy is not a common feature of turned out that the uncle of the child had been treated for typhoid. VL before. The girl’s sister had recently been treated for TB. A splenic abscess could cause chronic fever and spleno- The child’s health continued to deteriorate. She had permegaly, but would not explain the generalized lymphadesistently high fever and became increasingly pale. nopathy and the haematological changes, unless the The DAT came back positive with a high titre patient was acutely septic. ( 1:6.400), which supported the suspected diagnosis of vis Chronic schistosomiasis caused by Schistosoma mansoni ceral leishmaniasis. infection can cause splenomegaly in the context of portal Considering her critical condition, with severe malnutrihypertension, but patients would not be febrile and lymphtion and progressive anaemia, the patient was started on lipoadenopathy is not part of the picture either. somal amphotericin B and a broad-spectrum antibiotic Malignancies like leukaemia and lymphoma should be (ceftriaxone). The girl also received nutritional support with ruled out. high-energy/high-protein ready-to-use therapeutic food Answer to Question 2 (RUTF) and vitamin/mineral supplementation. How Would You Approach this Patient? After 5 days, the fever settled and the patient started to recover. Two weeks later the girl had gained some weight The little girl appears very sick and should be admitted to the and was again able to walk and play. hospital. The list of differential diagnoses is long and there are many tests that would be requested if the same patient presented in an affluent setting. In a resource-constrained place like South Sudan, a pragmatic clinical approach is necessary. The history should be taken as accurately as possible to narrow down the differential diagnosis. One should try to find out if the patient comes from an area where visceral leishmaniasis (VL) is endemic. For possible HIV infection, it would be of great importance to find out if the parents and siblings are alive and well; and enquiries should be made if there are any close contacts who are suspected to have TB or who have a history of recent TB treatment. The clinician has to cope with the investigations available, which may commonly not be in line with the internationally recommended standards. Gold standard for diagnosis of VL is the proof of the parasite in tissue specimens. However, this is often not feasible under field conditions and serological ward in South Sudan. tests are used instead. The rapid antigen test for VL (r K 39) used in this case was negative (sensitivity of this test in South Sudan is 85–90 %). SUMMARY BOX Because VL is high on the list of differential diagnoses, a second serological test such as the Direct Agglutination Test Visceral Leishmaniasis (Kala-Azar) (DAT) should be done, and direct proof of the parasite VL is a vector-borne systemic parasitic infection caused by should be attempted. Sensitivity is highest for splenic aspirates (93–99 %), fol- i L n e fa is n h t m um an . i L a a p rg ro e to e z p o id a e n m s, ic m s o h s a t v c e o b m e m en on d ly es L c . ri d b o e n d o i v n a E n a i s a t nd Af L ric . a lowed by bone marrow (53–86 %) and lymph node aspira- and the Indian subcontinent. As a result of efforts to eliminate the tion (53–65 %), which can be further increased by culture disease on the Indian subcontinent, the incidence of VL has and PCR. Splenic aspiration is complicated with life- decreased substantially in the past decade. Ninety per cent of all cases occur in only five countries: India, Sudan, South Sudan, threatening haemorrhages in about 0.1 % of procedures Ethiopia and Brazil. and therefore requires strict precautions, technical expertise Transmission can be anthroponotic or zoonotic, differing by and postinterventional monitoring. region and parasite strain. Humans most commonly acquire VL Blood cultures, if available, would be helpful for diagnosis through the bite of an infected female sandfly, but other modes of of typhoid fever, brucellosis and septicaemia. transmission have been described. --- PAGE BREAK -- Leishmania promastigotes invade cells of the human reticu- Treatment of VL is complex: efficacy of the individual drugs loendothelial system where they metamorphose into amastigotes varies geographically and depends on parasite susceptibility and and multiply. The incubation period varies greatly, from 10 days to the immune status of the patient. Parenteral drugs currently used several years, but usually takes between 2 and 8 months. are pentavalent antimonials, paromomycin and (liposomal) The clinical presentation depends on the infecting species, as amphotericin B ( well as on the host’s genetic background and immune status. Combinations of antileishmanial drugs seem to help shorten Most infections remain asymptomatic. therapy courses, reduce side effects, improve treatment out Clinical VL presents with symptoms and signs of a chronic comes, delay resistance development and reduce systemic infection (fever, fatigue, anorexia, weight loss) and of treatment costs. parasite invasion of the mononuclear phagocyte system (enlarged In HIV patients, VL is even more difficult to treat because it lymph nodes, splenomegaly, hepatomegaly) resulting in severe does not respond well to the classic antileishmanial drugs and has immunosuppression. In India, hyperpigmentation has led to the a higher tendency to relapse. name ‘kala-azar’ (Hindi for ‘black sickness’). VL is typically fatal if not treated, and potentially fatal complications include bacterial Further Reading superinfections and congestive heart failure because of severe anaemia and haemorrhage. In low-resource settings, diagnostic options for VL are often 1. Boelaert M, Sundar S. Leishmaniasis. In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s limited. On FBC all three cell lines can be depleted. Demonstration Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 [ of Leishmania amastigotes in samples from bone marrow, spleen 2. WHO. Control of the Leishmaniases. WHO Technical Report and lymph node is the classic confirmatory test for VL. Under field Series 949. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2010. conditions, direct proof of the parasite is often not feasible, and 3. Burza S, Croft SL, Boelaert M. Leishmaniasis. Lancet 2018;392 several serological tests have been developed instead. Sensitivity (10151):951–70. and specificity of these tests generally vary and they should 4. Chappuis F, Sundar S, Hailu A, et al. Visceral Leishmaniasis: what always be used in combination with a standardized case definition are the needs for diagnosis, treatment and control? Nat Rev Microas suggested by the WHO. The r K 39 immuno-chromatographic test (ICT) and the direct biol 2007;5(11):873–82. agglutination test (DAT) were found to have the highest sensitivity 5. Alves F, Bilbe G, Blesson S, et al. Recent development of visceral and specificity. The r K 39 ICTs are easy to perform, rapid leishmaniasis treatments: successes, pitfalls, and perspectives. Clin (10–20 minutes), cheap and give easily reproducible results. The Microbiol Rev 2018;31(4):e 00048–18. semiquantitative DAT has a longer turnaround time of about 24 hours, and requires a laboratory with well-trained technicians.