45 A 2-Month-Old Girl from Laos With Dyspnoea, Cyanosis and Irritability MAYFONG MAYXAY, DOUANGDAO SOUKALOUN AND PAUL N. NEWTON Answer to Question 1 Clinical Presentation What Are Your Most Important Differential History Diagnoses? You are working in the paediatric intensive care unit (PICU) The most important differential diagnoses to consider are of a tertiary hospital in Vientiane, Laos. A 2-month-old baby congenital heart disease, respiratory diseases (e. g. bronchogirl is presented with 3 days of irritability, dyspnoea and pneumonia, bronchiolitis and laryngitis), meningitis and grunting. Her mother is a 24-year-old rice farmer who infantile beriberi (thiamine or vitamin B 1 deficiency). describes that the baby suddenly became unwell but was nei- However, the absence of cough, wheeze and fever, along ther feverish nor coughing. The infant was born at term and with a normal chest examination, suggest that respiratory dishad been very well until 3 days previously. eases are unlikely. The fact that the cyanosis has started well after birth along with the sudden onset of symptoms and the absence of a heart murmur suggests that congenital heart dis Clinical Findings ease is unlikely. Absence of fever or bulging fontanels makes Irritable infant, crying and grunting, with a temperature of meningitis unlikely. The combination of dyspnoea, poor 37.0°C (98.6°F), pulse 140 bpm (normal range 100– breastfeeding, abnormal cry, grunting and swollen extremi 160), respiratory rate 40 breath cycles per minute (normal ties in a suitable endemic setting (South-east Asia) suggest range 30–60). The blood pressure is not taken. The child infantile beriberi as the most likely diagnosis. is dyspnoeic and has central cyanosis, hepatomegaly and oedematous extremities. The rest of the physical examination Answer to Question 2 appears normal, with a clear chest and no heart murmurs. What Additional Information Do You Need to Obtain from the Mother and What Would be Your Questions Immediate Management? 1. What are your most important differential diagnoses? The most important information to be obtained from the 2. What additional information do you need to obtain from mother is whether the child has been exclusively breastfed, the mother and what would be your immediate whether the mother had practiced food avoidance during management? pregnancy and/or post-partum, and whether the mother herself has had any symptoms and signs suggestive of beriberi, Discussion such as paresthesias and difficulty rising from a squatting position. A young Lao mother presents with her 2-month-old baby Prolonged food avoidance post-partum is common in girl, who has been acutely unwell for the past 3 days. The lowland Lao culture. It is based upon the traditional belief child has been breastfeeding poorly and was noted to have that certain food items may harm the newborn. Most lowbeen grunting, which is a non-specific sign of severe systemic land mothers eat milled glutinous rice but avoid eating fruits illness in infants. On examination, the child is irritable, cya- and vegetables, which results in low diet diversity for some nosed and shows signs of heart failure. months before and after delivery. 124 --- PAGE BREAK -- Thiamine deficiency may be one result of such dietary often preceded by a hoarse cry, grunting, poor breastfeeding, restriction, and affected mothers secrete insufficient levels irritability, dyspnoea and cyanosis. Clinically unapparent thiamine of thiamine in their breastmilk. The cardiac form of thiamine deficiency was also found to be common among sick infants deficiency usually manifests during the second or third admitted to the hospitals in Laos. A thiamine-deficient diet is largely made up of milled, sticky rice month of life. Infants present with dyspnoea, cyanosis, that has had most of its thiamine removed as a result of the milling vomiting and irritability. process. In the late nineteenth century, the advent of mechanical Children with infantile beriberi respond rapidly (i. e. rice milling, which removes the main dietary source of thiamine in within 30–60 min) to intravenous or intramuscular thiamine the rice husk, is thought to be the precipitant for beriberi (50 mg), which should urgently be administered. The child becoming a major public health problem in Asia, responsible for considerable mortality. However, there has been very little recent should be closely monitored. epidemiological research, despite evidence that it remains focally important. The Case Continued… The pathophysiology of infantile beriberi remains unclear, but the cardinal problem is usually myocardial dysfunction. Thiamine The mother reported that her child had been exclusively deficiency may also present with a variety of other clinical syndromes, including encephalopathy, hypoglycemia and lactic breastfed and that she had practiced food avoidance since acidosis. delivery: She had avoided eating beef, pork, vegetables and Infantile beriberi is usually diagnosed clinically because of the fruits. The mother said that she herself had anorexia, weak- need to act before biochemical results are available and the lack ness, a husky voice, and paresthesias affecting her limbs – of laboratories in endemic areas that can perform thiamine biosymptoms of thiamine deficiency. chemical assays. Treatment of infantile beriberi with thiamine is simple, inexpensive and highly effective. It should be administered Intravenous thiamine (50 mg) was given immediately to parenterally to rapidly increase tissue thiamine levels. Thiamine the child after admission and she quickly and dramatically supplementation should also be given to the mothers of infants responded. Six hours later the baby was able to breastfeed with beriberi. Education about thiamine-rich foods (e. g. pulses, normally and was discharged the following day. Blood sam- groundnuts, whole wheat, fruits and vegetables) and on the ples were taken from the child and the mother. Analysis danger of food avoidance should be provided before discharge. Prevention is crucial: better understanding of post-partum diets, showed that both were thiamine-deficient. and on how to change the practice of food avoidance is very The mother was given oral thiamine supplementation and important and thiamine supplementation for mothers is advised to return to a well-balanced diet including thiamine- urgently needed. rich foods. SUMMARY BOX Further Reading Infantile Beriberi 1. Abrams S, Brabin BJ, Coulter JBS. Nutrition-associated disease. Infantile beriberi, or clinical thiamine (vitamin B 1) deficiency in In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. infants, is a largely forgotten, fatal but inexpensively treated dis London: Elsevier; 2013 [ ease. It mainly occurs in South and South-east Asia, where 50 to 2. Barennes H, Simmala C, Odermatt P, et al. Postpartum traditions 100 years ago it was recognized as a major public health problem. and nutrition practices among urban Lao women and their infants It remains relatively common in Laos, probably because of prolonged maternal food avoidance during pregnancy and post- in Vientiane. Lao PDR Eur J Clin Nutr 2009;63(3):323–31. partum. There is also evidence that it is still of importance in 3. Barennes H, Sengkhamyong K, Rene JP, et al. Beriberi (Thiamine Cambodia, India and Myanmar, and cases have been reported deficiency) and high infant mortality in Northern Laos. PLo S Negl from refugee populations in Thailand. Trop Dis 2015;9(3):e 0003581. Infantile beriberi occurs in exclusively breastfed babies of 4. Bhat JI, Ahmed QI, Ahangar AA, et al. Wernicke’s encephalopathy approximately 2 to 3 months of age, whose mothers have thia- in exclusive breastfed infants. World J Pediatr 2017;13(5):485–8. mine deficiency resulting from inadequate thiamine intake. 5. Whitfield KC, Bourassa MW, Adamolekun B, et al. Thiamine defi It commonly manifests mainly as the “wet” form of beriberi, ciency disorders: diagnosis, prevalence, and a roadmap for global characterized by heart failure with hepatomegaly and marked control programs. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2018;1430(2018):3–43. peripheral oedema. The disease typically presents as shock,