46 A 45-Year-Old Man from Sri Lanka With Fever and Right Hypochondrial Pain RANJAN PREMARATNA Clinical Presentation TABLE Laboratory Results at Presentation 46.1 History Parameter Patient Reference A 45-year-old Sri Lankan man presents to a local hospital with fever, chills, headache, body aches and severe right WBC ( 109 /L) 14.7 4–10 hypochondrial pain for the past week. He has also developed Haemoglobin (g/d L) 12.3 12–16 a dry cough during the past few days. He has vomited twice Platelets ( 109 /L) 224 150–350 during his illness and has lost his appetite. His abdominal pain is constant and dull. It radiates to the AST (U/L) 54 13–33 right shoulder and is made worse when coughing and resting ALT (U/L) 38 3–25 on the right side. ALP (U/L) 446 40–130 The patient had been well before the current illness. He admits to consuming locally brewed alcohol (‘toddy’, made of Serum bilirubin total (μmol/L) 10.3 25.7–30.8 coconut flowers) daily for the past 10 to 15 years. Serum bilirubin direct (μmol/L) 1.5 1.7–5.1 Blood urea nitrogen (mmol/L) 7 2.5–6.4 Examination Serum creatinine (μmol/L) 124 71–106 The patient looks generally ill, mildly dehydrated and is in C-reactive protein (mg/L) 48 <6 pain. Temperature is 38.3°C (100.8°F), blood pressure 100 /80 mm Hg, pulse 102 bpm, respiratory rate 24 breath cycles per minute. There is no jaundice, no pallor and no lymphadenopathy. The abdominal examination reveals a Discussion tender hepatomegaly; however, the tenderness is most prominent over the 6 th to 9 th intercostal spaces in the right mid A 45-year-old Sri Lankan man presents with fever, headache, axillary line. The spleen is not enlarged. On auscultation, body aches and constant right-sided abdominal pain for a there are few inspiratory crackles over the right lung base. week. He also has a dry cough. His past medical history is The cardiovascular system and the nervous system are clinunremarkable, but he consumes local alcohol. He is febrile ically normal. with tender hepatomegaly and intercostal tenderness on the right. There is no jaundice. Investigations His blood results show very mildly elevated transaminases, an elevated alkaline phosphatase (AP) and raised His laboratory results are shown in Table 46.1. A chest radioinflammatory markers. graph showed elevated right hemidiaphragm and patchy shadows in the right lower zone. Answer to Question 1 What is the Likely Diagnosis? Questions Tender hepatomegaly, intercostal tenderness and an elevated 1. What is the likely diagnosis? right hemidiaphragm in the context of fever point towards an 2. How would you manage this patient? infectious focus in the liver. 126 --- PAGE BREAK -- His transaminases are only slightly elevated; AST is higher TABLE Treatment of Amoebic Liver Abscesses. than ALT, which could be explained merely by his regular 46.2 (After Anesi, J. A., 2015) alcohol consumption. In infectious hepatitis one would Agent Medication Dose Duration expect higher transaminase levels and clinical jaundice. The most likely diagnosis in this man is a liver abscess, Tissue Metronidazole 500–750 7–10 days which could be amoebic or pyogenic. Given the Asian set- Agents mg IV/PO ting, hyermucoviscous serotypes of Klebisella pneumoniae TDS have to be considered which have been increasingly Tinidazole 2 g PO OD 3–5 days detected in South and South East Asia since around Ornidazole 0.5 g IV BD 3–6 days 1990 and also seem to be spreading to countries outside Asia. Given the epidemiological setting, the relatively Nitazoxanide 500 mg 3 days PO BD young age of the patient and the absence of comorbidities such as diabetes or biliary disease, an amoebic liver abscess Luminal Paromomycin 8–10 mg/ 7 days is more likely. Also, the alcoholic drink the patient con- Agents kg PO TDS sumes is locally known to be linked with amoebiasis. The precise mechanisms are still under discussion; it is Diloxanide Furoate 500 mg 10 days assumed that the parasites contaminate the clay containers TDS used to collect toddy, but additional factors may play a role Iodoquinole 650 mg 20 days as well. (Diiodohydroxyquin) PO TDS after meals Another tropical infectious disease to consider in a febrile patient from Asia with any kind of organ abscess PO ¼ orally, IV ¼ intravenously, BD ¼ twice daily, TDS ¼ three times a day. is melioidosis. Melioidosis, caused by the environmental bacterium Burkholderia pseudomallei, can also present with pulmonary infiltrates and cavities similar to TB, as septic arthritis, with skin manifestations and with cerebral The patient was treated with metronidazole for ten days involvement. Cases of melioidosis have been increasingly and made a rapid and uneventful recovery. reported from Sri Lanka. The majority of cases occur in the immunocompromised, especially with type 2 diabetes SUMMARY BOX mellitus, but also alcoholism, chronic lung disease, chronic renal disease, steroid use, immunosuppressive therapy and Amoebic Liver Abscess cancer. Amoebic liver abscess (ALA) is the most common extraintestinal Melioidosis is also endemic in other parts of Asia, such as form of invasive amoebiasis caused by Entamoeba histolytica. India, Thailand, Lao PR, Vietnam and in northern Australia, The infection occurs worldwide but is most common in tropical sporadic cases are seen all over the tropics. areas with overcrowding and poor sanitation. Rates of ALA are 3 to 20 times higher in men between 18 and 50 years of age than Answer to Question 2 in other populations; the reasons for this are poorly understood but hormonal factors are being discussed, as well as alcohol How Would You Manage This Patient? consumption. Humans acquire the infection by ingestion of An ultrasound of the liver should be done. Entamoeba histo- faecally contaminated food or water. Trophozoites of E. histolytica lytica serology is highly sensitive and useful as a screening may penetrate the intestinal wall and haematogenously spread to the liver. Clinical manifestations include fever with chills, right test; however, it may lack specificity in individuals from hypochondrial pain, anorexia and weight loss, but most patients highly endemic tropical regions like the Indian subcontinent. with ALA do not have a history of recent dysentery. A dry cough Recently, multiplex PCR testing on aspirated fluid has been and fine crepitations over the right lung bases are common. identified as a rapid and robust diagnosis of amoebic liver Jaundice is unusual. Localized intercostal tenderness helps in the clinical diagnosis. ALA may rupture into the peritoneal cavity or abscess in patients with cystic focal liver lesions. Stool through the skin or diaphragm. Haematogenous spread may microscopy for E. histolytica trophozoites may be attempted cause metastatic abscesses in distant organs such as the brain. but is less than 50 % sensitive. Leukocytosis, raised inflammatory parameters and an elevated alkaline phosphatase are the most common non-specific laboratory findings. Diagnosis is usually made by a combination of The Case Continued… imaging studies and serology. Abdominal ultrasound scan is the most suitable imaging technique in resource-limited settings, but The ultrasound scan of his abdomen revealed a solitary CT and MRI scans are also highly sensitive. None of the imaging hypoechoic lesion with an irregular wall measuring techniques is specific for ALA. Plain radiography of the thorax may 7 6 cm in the right liver lobe. There was a small pleural reveal elevation of the right hemidiaphragm. effusion on the right. Serology is highly sensitive but may lack specificity in individuals from endemic countries. Although aspiration of a sus Because of its large size, the lesion was aspirated under pected ALA is not a routine investigation, aspirated fluid can be ultrasound guidance, yielding brownish pus highly suspitested with multiplex PCR testing for the rapid and robust diagcious of an amoebic liver abscess. nosis of amoebiasis in patients with cystic focal liver lesions. The --- PAGE BREAK -- 128 Further Reading aspirated fluid is thick, odourless and brownish in colour; it is bacteriologically sterile and amoebic trophozoites are not usually detectable in the aspirate. The term ‘abscess’ is a misnomer, as 1. Kelly P. Intestinal protozoa. In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical the ‘pus’ is in fact necrotic liver. Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 [ Most patients rapidly respond to antibiotic treatment with 2. Anesi JA, Gluckman G. Amebic Liver Abscess. Clin Liver Dis metronidazole or tinidazole. 2015;6(2):41–3. Metronidazole 500 to 750 mg tds PO or IV should be given for 3. Siu LK, Yeh KM, Lin JC, Fung CP, Chang FY. Klebsiella pneumo 7 to 10 days, tinidazole 2 g per day PO for 3 to 5 days. This should niae liver abscess: a new invasive syndrome. Lancet Infect Dis be followed by a luminal amoebicide, such as paromomycin, 2012;12:881–7. diloxanide furoate, or iodoquinol (Table 46.2). 4. Weitzel T, Cabrera J, Rosas R, et al. Enteric multiplex PCR The role of therapeutic percutaneous aspiration or drainage panels: a new diagnostic tool for amoebic liver abscess? New is still controversial. It may be useful in large abscesses, especially when located in the left liver lobe with high risk for Microbes New Infect 2017;18:50–3. https://doi. org/10.1016 / rupturing into the pericardium, and in ALA that do not respond j. nmni.2017.05.002. to nitroimidazole therapy within 72 hours when pyogenic 5. Kumanan T, Sujanitha V, Balakumar S, et al. Amoebic liver infection is a concern. Lesions may take a long time to decrease abscess and indigenous alcoholic beverages in the tropics. in size, therefore short-term, follow-up imaging has to be J Trop Med 2018;2018:6901751. https://doi. org/10.1155 / interpreted with caution. 2018 /6901751.