47 A 32-Year-Old Man from Malawi With a Painfully Swollen Neck JOEP J. VAN OOSTERHOUT Clinical Presentation There are large, matted lymph glands palpable in his neck. The rest of the examination is unremarkable. History Investigations A 32-year-old Malawian man presents to the outpatient department of a local tertiary hospital with a 6-week history Full blood count: WBC 14.3 109 /L (reference range: of productive cough and chest pain associated with weight 4–10), haemoglobin 6.3 g/d L (13–15), MCV 66 f L loss, fevers and night sweats. He has also noticed that his (80–98), platelets 246 109 /L (150–350). neck has swollen and is painful. There are no other symp Three sputum samples are negative for AFB. Fine-needle toms. He has never been admitted to a hospital but has been aspiration (FNA) of a neck gland yields purulent material. tested HIV positive and was started on antiretroviral therapy Microscopy for AFB is 2+ positive. There is no growth on (ART) and co-trimoxazole prophylaxis 2 months earlier at a blood culture. nearby health centre. His health passport ( that a recent CD 4 count was 95 cells/μL and that the patient Initial treatment had been treated for acid-fast bacilli (AFB) sputum smearnegative pulmonary tuberculosis 12 years ago. The patient is admitted to the hospital and started on TB repeat treatment for tuberculous lymphadenitis with strepto Clinical Findings mycin, isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide and ethambutol, while continuing the same ART. Against expectation, he He looks moderately ill, is pale, is sweating and has a temperdoes not improve after 3 weeks. He still has fevers, night ature of 39.2°C (102.56°F), pulse 112 bpm, respiratory rate sweats, lack of appetite and the glands in the neck have fur 28 breath cycles per minute and normal blood pressure. ther swollen and are now clearly fluctuant ( booklet all patients in Malawi hold which documents their medical history. 129 --- PAGE BREAK -- 130 Questions The diagnosis at this point was superimposed bacterial lymphadenitis, possibly iatrogenic because of the earlier aspi 1. What could be the reasons for the lack of clinical ration, with Staphylococcus aureus being the most likely improvement? microorganism. The patient recovered well after incision 2. Which investigations are indicated? and drainage, antibiotic treatment and a short course of corticosteroids while he continued on TB treatment and ART. Discussion In the first full blood count, severe microcytic anaemia was present. Anaemia is extremely common in patients with A 32-year-old Malawian man who is known to be HIV pos- advanced HIV immunosuppression and TB co-infection; itive is admitted with a diagnosis of tuberculous lymphade- however, the marked microcytosis is unusual. There was nitis and immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome no good explanation for this finding because there was no (IRIS) of the unmasking type (see Summary Box). The source of blood loss in the history, and the MCV had nor TB diagnosis is based on microscopic findings. He unexpect- malized in the second full blood count, which was against edly deteriorates on antituberculous treatment. β-thalassaemia as a cause of microcytic anaemia. The first full blood count also showed a leukocytosis when TB lymphad Answer to Question 1 enitis was diagnosed. This finding is paradoxical because What Could Be the Reasons for the Lack of Clinical later, when the florid purulent bacterial infection was pre Improvement? sent, it had resolved. Multiple dynamic factors were apparently influencing the white blood cell count in this Although the diagnosis of TB lymphadenitis is very likely patient, including HIV, TB, bacterial infection, immune when AFB are identified in a lymph gland sample, atypical reconstitution, corticosteroids, antiretroviral and antitubermycobacteria should also be considered now that the initial culous drugs and co-trimoxazole. response to TB treatment is unsatisfactory, especially given the deep immune suppression the patient had at the start SUMMARY BOX of ART. Other reasons for a poor response to TB treatment are non-adherence, malabsorption and drug resistance. Immune Reconstitution Inflammatory Syndrome Given the frank fluctuation that is present, a bacterial lymph HIV-associated immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome adenitis is probable, whereas a lymphoma seems much less (IRIS) is a deterioration of the clinical situation caused by likely. increased inflammation because of improving immune competence resulting from successful ART. Answer to Question 2 The clinical manifestations are wide-ranging and depend on Which Investigations Are Indicated? the underlying condition, which is mostly an opportunistic infection, but can also be a tumour, an autoimmune disease or another HIV viral load and a CD 4 count should be done to deter- condition. In sub-Saharan Africa, tuberculosis and cryptococcal mine the response to ART. A repeat FNA should be per- meningitis are the two most important IRIS presentations. IRIS is formed to check for AFB. A Gram stain and bacterial very common, occurring in between 10 and 25 % of patients who start ART. There are no validated tests for IRIS. The diagnosis is culture should help rule out bacterial superinfection. Ideally, therefore clinical. the aspirate should be examined by PCR (XPert MTB/RIF) A widely accepted definition does not exist, although stanand also be cultured to rule out infection with resistant Myco- dardization has been attempted. Definitions include measures of bacterium tuberculosis or atypical mycobacteria (culture). successful ART, exclusion of other causes of the clinical deterioration, such as toxicity, and a relationship in time between the symptoms and the start of ART. The Case Continued… IRIS is classified into two types: In “unmasking IRIS”, a condition is present but remains subclinical and undiagnosed The patient denied missing any tablets, had no diarrhoea or because of severe immunosuppression before the start of ART, other gastrointestinal symptoms, and had not left Malawi, and becomes clinically apparent within 6 months after ART initiwhere multi-drug resistance for TB is uncommon. IRIS of ation. In “paradoxical IRIS”, a condition has been diagnosed and is being treated successfully, but clinical worsening occurs the paradoxical type was also considered to explain the lack because of the increased inflammation after immune recovery, of improvement (see Box), therefore corticosteroids were e. g. after starting ART. Risk factors for HIV-associated parainitiated. doxical IRIS include a low pre-ART CD 4 count and haemoglobin Further investigations were done, with the following level, a high pre-ART viral load, large pre-ART weight loss, large results: CD 4 109 cells/μL; HIV-1 RNA <400 copies/m L. and rapid increase of the CD 4 count, rapid reduction of the viral Repeat FBC results were: WBC 7.8 109 /L, haemoglobin load on ART and a short period between the start of treatment for 6.7 g/d L, MCV 84 f L, platelets 428 109 /L. a a n ted op a p lo o n rt g u s n id is e tic AR in T fec in tio se n le a c n t d ed in p iti a a t t i i e o n n ts of w A it R h T C . D P 4 re c d o n u is n o ts ne < in 1 i 0 ti 0 Because of the increasingly fluctuant swelling in the neck, cells/μL seems to reduce the risk of paradoxical IRIS and is not a second FNA was done, now showing frank yellowish pus. associated with significant adverse effects. On microscopic examination, numerous coccoid bacteria Paradoxical IRIS may also occur in other conditions, e. g. in TB alone without HIV co-infection when TB treatment itself induces and polymorphonuclear lymphocytes were observed. Unforimmune reconstitution. Patients have to be prepared for the IRIS tunately results from a bacterial culture were never received. phenomenon when starting treatment. --- PAGE BREAK -- Further Reading 4. Walker NF, Stek C, Wasserman S, et al. The tuberculosisassociated immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome: recent 1. Thwaites G. Tuberculosis. In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical advances in clinical and pathogenesis research. Curr Opin HIV Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 [ 2. Haddow LJ, Moosa MY, Easterbrook PJ. Validation of a published 5. Meintjes G, Stek C, Blumenthal L, et al. Prednisone for the Prevencase definition for tuberculosis-associated immune reconstitution tion of Paradoxical Tuberculosis-Associated IRIS. N Engl J Med inflammatory syndrome. AIDS 2010;24(1):103–8. 2018;379(20):1915–25. 3. Yu G, Zhong F, Ye B, et al. Diagnostic Accuracy of the Xpert MTB/ RIF assay for lymph node Tuberculosis: as systematic review and meta analysis. Bio Med Res Int 2019;2019:4878240.