48 A 31-Year-Old Woman from Tanzania With Acute Flaccid Paraplegia WILLIAM P. HOWLETT Clinical Presentation History A 31-year-old woman is referred to a hospital in northern Tanzania with a loss of power and feeling in her legs. She describes being perfectly well up until 2 days earlier when she felt acute back pain which radiated band-like to the level of her umbilicus. The pain was severe, continuous, burning and unrelieved by analgesics or position. Within 12 hours the pain had lessened but she developed numbness in her feet and legs ascending to the level of her waist, loss of power in her legs and loss of control of her bladder. There is a history plantar flexion of her feet. of a febrile illness 3 weeks previously, treated as malaria. There is no past or family history of similar illness and no Discussion history of trauma. She is married with 3 children, the last born is 12 months old. She does not smoke or take alcohol, A 31-year-old woman from northern Tanzania presents with and her HIV status during her last pregnancy was negative. an acute-onset inability to walk. She had a febrile illness 3 weeks prior, but has otherwise been well. Clinical Findings Answer to Question 1 What is the Clinical Syndrome and Where is the Clinically, she is well nourished with normal vital signs. Gen Lesion? eral examination is unremarkable; there is no spinal tenderness, deformity or gibbus. On neurological examination she The clinical syndromic diagnosis is acute flaccid paraparesis. is fully orientated and higher mental functions appear nor- The main neuroanatomical differential diagnoses of flaccid mal. Cranial nerves including fundoscopy and upper limbs paraparesis are lesions of peripheral nerves, including their are normal. She is unable to move her legs and examination roots (polyneuropathies or polyradiculoneuropathies), and of the lower limbs reveals a flaccid paraparesis with a sensory acute lesions of the spinal cord (myelopathies). The sensory level at T 10. On inspection feet are in a slightly plantar- impairment up to the umbilicus (T 10 level) and extensor flexed position ( is reduced (MRC grade 1 /5) in all muscle groups. Reflexes cord. The flaccidity and loss of reflexes can be explained are absent bilaterally, and plantar reflexes are extensor. Sen- by the early flaccid phase of acute spinal cord injury when sation is reduced to light touch to the level of the umbilicus. spasticity appears days or weeks later (Table 48.1). Joint position sense is impaired in the feet and ankles, and vibration sense is absent to the anterior iliac crest bilaterally. Answer to Question 2 What Investigations Will You Plan to Do? Questions If available, the following investigations should be performed: 1. What is the clinical syndrome and where is the lesion? Full blood count, ESR, blood glucose, renal and liver 2. What investigations will you plan to do? function tests, HIV serology, VDRL test and schistosomiasis 132 --- PAGE BREAK -- TABLE Flaccid versus Spastic Paraparesis 48.1 Neuroanatomical Examples of Common Aetiologies in Clinical Presentation Diagnosis Tropical Countries Flaccid with bladder involvement and/or Acute spinal cord lesion inflammation of the spinal cord (¼ myelitis), paraparesis sensory level ischaemia of the spinal cord (¼ spinal infarction) Acute cauda equina metastatic malignancy, schistosomiasis lesion without bladder dysfunction, without Polyradiculoneuropathy Guillain-Barre -syndrome, tuberculous sensory level arachnoiditis, CMV in HIV Polyneuropathy Diabetes, HIV-related, nutritional Spastic paraparesis Chronic spinal cord Compression of spinal cord because of Pott´s lesion disease, chronic viral infections such as HTLV-1 and HIV serology. The latter has to be interpreted with caution TABLE CSF Results because it stays positive after past infection. Urine and stool 48.3 analysis for ova of Schistosoma species should be done. Normal Lumbar puncture should be performed with measure Parameter (Unit) Patient range ment of opening pressure and testing cell differentiation, CSF protein, glucose, Gram and Ziehl-Neelsen stain, Xpert CSF white cell count 11 (90 % 0–5 MTB/RIF for M. tuberculosis and VDRL. Imaging should (cells/μl) lymphocytes) include x-rays of the chest and spine. Neuroimaging (e. g. spi- CSF protein (g/L) 1.11 <0.45 nal CT/MRI) is recommended mainly to exclude a compres CSF glucose (mmol/l) 3.9 2.8–3.8∗ sive spinal cord lesion but is usually not readily available in sub-Saharan Africa. Gram stain negative negative Ziehl-Neelsen stain negative negative The Case Continued… Xpert MTB/RIF negative negative The patient’s full blood count, renal and liver function tests VDRL in the CSF negative negative were normal. Results of further blood tests are shown in the ∗{1 /2} to {2 /3} of paired serum glucose sample A spinal tap was done. The CSF opening pressure was normal and looked clear. Further CSF results are shown in the Table 48.3. The x-rays of her chest and thoracolumbar spine were normal. The main differential diagnosis of acute non-compressive TABLE flaccid paraparesis that localizes in the spinal cord is acute Laboratory Results on Admission 48.2 spinal cord inflammation (acute transverse myelitis), and Normal vascular spinal cord ischaemia (“spinal stroke”). The CSF Parameter (Unit) Patient range findings of increased lymphocytes and elevated protein level are suggestive of inflammation in the spinal cord. Hence, the ESR (mm/h) 19 10 clinicolaboratory diagnosis is that of acute transverse Random blood glucose 5.6 3.9–11.1 myelitis. (mmol/l) The management is based on principles of establishing HIV-Serology and p 24 Antigen negative negative and treating the cause and preventing complications. Treatment in this patient includes steroids and acyclovir directed VDRL negative negative against the main causes of acute transverse myelitis, e. g. auto Schistosomiasis-serology negative negative immune inflammation and viral infections (see Summary Urine for ova of negative negative Box). Counselling of patient and family is very important, S. haematobium and family members/guardians should from the beginning Stool for ova of S. mansoni negative negative on be actively involved in physiotherapy and mobilization of the patient. General measures include strict 2 hourly --- PAGE BREAK -- 134 turning, frequent passive movements, urinary catheterization if non-functioning bladder, and adequate analgesia according SUMMARY BOX to the WHO analgesic ladder. The patient was treated with corticosteroids and acyclovir. Acute Transverse Myelitis She partially improved and was discharged after 3 weeks. The Acute transverse myelitis (ATM) is an inflammation of the spinal power in her legs had slightly improved (MRC 2-3 /5) and cord characterized by an acute (hours) or sub-acute (days) onset, she had a urinary catheter in situ. She will be reviewed in presenting typically with back pain, flaccid paraplegia, a sensory the outpatient department. level on the trunk and urinary incontinence. The incidence of ATM in tropical countries is reported to be <1 /100 000 but is likely to be much higher particularly in Africa. Women are more frequently TABLE Pathophysiology of Acute Transverse affected, typically in their second and fourth decades. Evidence of 48.4 Myelitis inflammation within the spinal cord is shown by increased lymphocytes and elevated protein in the CSF. It can be associated Pathophysiology Treatment with infections and autoimmune disorders. Symptoms that suggest infection include fever, rash, adenopathy, concurrent sys Idiopathic, Presumably an Corticosteroids temic infection and symptoms of herpes zoster radiculopathy. If (majority of the autoimmune against the aetiology remains unknown as is frequently the case, the ATM cases) phenomenon inflammation is termed idiopathic (Table 48.4). Idiopathic ATM is considered to Might be a be an autoimmune phenomenon. “Idiopathic” ATM can be the manifestation of a first attack of an autoimmune demyelinating disease such as chronic autoimmune neuromyelitis optica (NMO) and rarely multiple sclerosis. Howdemyelinating CNS ever, multiple sclerosis is very rare in tropical latitudes. disease (such as NMO Treatment of idiopathic ATM in adults is largely empirical with and multiple sclerosis) high doses of IV corticosteroids followed by oral prednisolone for Associated Direct invasion of the Causative 2 to 3 weeks. Empirical acyclovir is also recommended if VZV or with infection spinal cord by treatment e. g. HSV myelitis cannot be excluded. The majority (70 % to 80 %) of microorganisms acyclovir for patients with ATM remain disabled with flaccid paraparesis/ VZV myelitis paraplegia and incontinence. Autoimmune Corticosteroids phenomenon as a against Further Reading result of infection inflammation elsewhere 1. Heckmann JE, Bhigjee AI. Tropical neurology. In: Farrar J, editor. (“parainfectious”) Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 Might be associated [ with vaccination against the 2. Borchers AT, Gershwin ME. Transverse myelitis. Autoimmun Rev microorganism 2012;11(3):231–48. 3. Howlett WP. Paraplegia, In: Neurology in Africa. Kilimanjaro Associated Autoimmune Corticosteroids Christian Medical Centre and University of Bergen; 2012. Availwith a phenomenon against able from:www. uib. no/cih/en/resources/neurology-in-africa. systemic Often the autoimmune inflammation autoimmune disorder (e. g. lupus or 4. Musubire AK, Meya DB, Bohjanen PR, et al. A systematic review disorder secondary vasculitis) in of non-traumatic spinal cord injuries in sub-Saharan Africa and the patient is already a proposed diagnostic algorithm for resource-limited settings. known Front Neurol 2017;8:618. https://doi. org/10.3389 /fneur. 2017.00618.