49 A 33-Year-Old Male Traveller to India With Diarrhoea and Flatulence for Two Weeks GAGANDEEP KANG AND SUDHIR BABJI Clinical Presentation Laboratory Results History Stool for reducing substances: positive. Stool examination for enteric parasites: Giardia trophozoites are seen in the fresh A 33-year-old man from Finland who had been backpacking specimen. Giardia cysts are detected on formol-ether conin India for the previous month presents to a private doctor centrated specimens ( in Chinglepet, Tamil Nadu, with complaints of passage of loose stools (four or five episodes per day) for the past Questions 2 weeks. He reports weight loss, anorexia, malaise, flatulence and abdominal cramping when passing stool. For the past 1. What clinical features can be used to establish an aetiolo 3 days he has had bloating and distension after intake of milk gical diagnosis of infectious diarrhoea in the tropics? products with an urge to pass stool. He has mild nausea, but 2. What complications can result from an acute enteric no fever. Stools were watery earlier but he went to a local infection? pharmacy and was given ciprofloxacin, which he took for 5 days ending 2 days previously, and stools are now three Discussion or four per day, mushy, greasy and foul-smelling. Clinical Findings A 33-year-old Finnish traveller to India presents with passage of loose stools, four or five episodes a day for the past 2 weeks. A 33-year-old man, 180 cm, 72 kg (reports a 4 kg weight The stools have become greasy and foul-smelling, and he has loss), mild non-specific abdominal tenderness. No signs of bloating and distension after consumption of milk or milk dehydration. The rest of the examination is normal. products. (B) of Giardia species. 135 --- PAGE BREAK -- 136 The presence of Giardia trophozoites and cysts in the is typically high volume, watery and often associated with stool sample is confirmatory of giardiasis. The presence of malabsorption and dehydration. Colonic involvement is reducing substances in the stool indicates a carbohydrate more often associated with frequent small-volume stools, malabsorption, most likely of post-infectious origin. the presence of blood and a sensation of urgency. Chronic diarrhoea or recurrent episodes of acute diarrhoea should prompt HIV testing. Answer to Question 1 What Clinical Features Can be Used to Establish an Answer to Question 2 Aetiological Diagnosis of Infectious Diarrhoea in the Tropics? What Complications Can Result from an Acute Enteric Infection? In the absence of a laboratory, clinical features sometimes provide a clue to the cause of infectious diarrhoea Common complications of acute enteric infections are (Table 49.1). Diarrhoea caused by small intestinal infection shown in Table 49.2. TABLE Clinical Clues to Pathology and Possible Aetiological Agents of Diarrhoeal Disease 49.1 Clinical Observation Pathophysiology Possible Aetiology Few, bulky or large Small bowel, Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli (ETEC), enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC), watery stools secretory Salmonella, Vibrio parahaemolyticus, Giardia, possibly Shigella Large volume, watery Small bowel, Vibrio cholerae, ETEC, Cryptosporidium diarrhoea enterotoxin mediated Many, small volume Large bowel Shigella, Salmonella, Campylobacter, Yersinia enterocolitica, Clostridium stools perfringens, Entamoeba histolytica Tenesmus, faecal Colitis E. histolytica, enteroinvasive E. coli (EIEC), enterohaemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC), urgency, dysentery Shigella, Campylobacter, Y. enterocolitica, Clostridioides difficile Associated with Gastroenteritis or Noroviruses, rotavirus in children, Bacillus cereus, Staphylococcus aureus (food vomiting toxin mediated poisoning) Associated with fever Mucosal invasion or in E. histolytica, EIEC, EHEC, Shigella, Salmonella, C. difficile, Campylobacter, children viral agents Persistent diarrhoea Secondary Giardia, Cryptosporidium, E. histolytica, Aeromonas. (>2 weeks) malabsorption, In immunosuppression: Cystoisospora belli, Cryptosporidium, Microsporidium invasion TABLE Common Complications of Acute Enteric Infections 49.2 Complication Pathogen Carbohydrate intolerance or malabsorption Giardia lamblia/intestinalis, rotavirus and other forms of viral gastroenteritis, Fat malabsorption Giardia lamblia/intestinalis Haemolytic uraemic syndrome Enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli (EHEC), Shigella dysenteriae Guillain–Barre syndrome Campylobacter jejuni Reactive arthritis Campylobacter, Salmonella, Shigella, Yersinia spp. Erythema nodosum Campylobacter, Salmonella, Shigella, Yersinia spp Enteritis necroticans Clostridium perfringens type C Liver abscess and other forms of extraintestinal Entamoeba histolytica amoebiasis Chronic fatigue syndrome Giardia lamblia/intestinalis, particularly described from Scandinavia --- PAGE BREAK -- The Case Continued… through hand-to-mouth transmission. This involves eating contaminated food or touching contaminated surfaces and The patient was given tinidazole 2 g as a single oral dose. He unknowingly swallowing the parasite. The signs and symptoms of was advised to restrict milk and high sugar products for a giardiasis usually occur within 7 to 14 days of exposure. Sympperiod of 2 weeks. He was counselled on food and water toms include diarrhoea, pale greasy stools, stomach cramps, safety when travelling and was asked to return after 3 days. gas, nausea, vomiting, bloating, weight loss and weakness. The symptoms usually last for 1 to 2 weeks, but may last longer. On review, he stated that his stool consistency had returned Giardiasis can cause malabsorption of vitamin A, vitamin B , iron, to normal and the frequency had decreased, he had no nausea fat and carbohydrates in up to 20–40 % of patients. Malabs 1 o 2 rption and his anorexia had decreased. He had eaten a local dessert can sometimes be prolonged and take several weeks to disapthe previous day without realizing that it was made of pear. Chronic and multiple infections in young children have been reduced milk and had experienced some bloating and dis- shown to cause long-term effects on growth leading to stunting. The most common treatment is administration of drugs of the comfort, but was otherwise feeling much better. nitroimidazole group, with tinidazole being the drug of choice followed by metronidazole. Tinidazole is effective as a single dose SUMMARY BOX of 2 g, and metronidazole 500 mg is given tds for 5 to 7 days. Nonresponsiveness to nitroimidazole treatment is increasingly seen, Giardiasis in particular in travellers to South Asia where rates can reach up to Giardiasis is caused by Giardia intestinalis (also called G. lamblia), 50 %. Other drugs used are e. g. quinacrine, nitazoxanide and a flagellate protozoan. The parasite is present throughout the furazolidone. world, with several species found in animals. Not all infections result in symptoms, particularly in tropical countries where local Further Reading populations with constant exposure rarely develop disease. Symptomatic giardiasis is common in travellers to regions of 1. Kelly P. Intestinal protozoa. In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical South and South-east Asia, Africa, the Middle East and Latin America, particularly where clean water supplies and standards of Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 [ food hygiene are low. 2. Ross AG, Olds GR, Cripps AW, et al. Enteropathogens and chronic Giardia trophozoites are found in the small intestine of illness in returning travelers. N Engl J Med 2013;368(19):1817–25. humans, and these non-invasive parasites appear to cause 3. Kaiser L, Surawicz CM. Infectious causes of chronic diarrhoea. Best diarrhoea by blocking the absorptive surfaces of the gut and Pract Res Clin Gastroenterol 2012;26(5):563–71. possibly by inducing fluid secretion. The trophozoites produce an 4. Wright SG. Protozoan infections of the gastrointestinal tract. Infect environmentally resistant form, the cyst, which is passed in stool Dis Clin North Am 2012;26(2):323–39. and enters the soil, water, food, or other surfaces after bowel 5. Watkins RR, Eckmann L. Treatment of giardiasis: current status movements. The most common method of infection is by drinking and future directions. Curr Infect Dis Rep 2014;16(2):396. contaminated water. However, people may also become infected