50 A 24-Year-Old Man of Turkish Origin With Jaundice and Cystic Liver Lesions MARIJA STOJKOVIC Clinical Presentation of albendazole in cysts with calcified cyst walls is rather poor. Being free of symptoms, the patient refused surgical treat History ment. The cysts were monitored regularly by ultrasound for signs of spontaneous involution. A 24-year-old man of Turkish origin presents at a hospital in Germany because of right upper quadrant pain, nausea and vomiting. Clinical Findings The patient is a German resident but visits his family in A 24-year-old man in fair general condition with scleral jaunrural eastern Turkey (Anatolia) every year for about 6 weeks. dice. Blood pressure 110 /70 mm Hg, pulse 64 bpm, temper Three years earlier the patient had presented with right ature 36°C (96.8°F). There is right upper quadrant and upper quadrant pain. Then, an ultrasound and a CT scan of epigastric tenderness, but no guarding. the liver had revealed two calcified cystic lesions, one in the right liver lobe, another smaller cyst in the left liver lobe (Figs. 50.1 A and B and 50.2). Serology was positive for Echinococcus granu- Laboratory Findings losus and a diagnosis of cystic echinococcosis (CE) was made. Since both cyst walls were already calcified, anthelmintic The full blood count is normal. Additional results are shown treatment was not considered an option as the bioavailability in Table 50.1. One lesion is located in the right liver lobe (7 6 cm). Cyst content shows a solid cyst matrix containing multiple smaller cysts (A). The cyst wall is partially calcified (WHO classification CE 3 b). (B) Second cystic lesion in the left liver lobe (5 4 cm). The cyst wall is up to 4 mm thick with partial calcification. Cyst content is liquid; there is a double line sign, a feature of WHO CE 1, and hydatid sand. (Copyright W. Hosch, Department of Radiology, Heidelberg University Hospital.) 138 --- PAGE BREAK -- In case of biliary obstruction, the first step is to restore the biliary flow by endoscopic retrograde cholangiography (ERC). ERC is both a diagnostic and therapeutic tool in cases of biliary obstruction; cyst content can be extracted from the hepatic or common bile duct. In case of bacterial cholangitis, the patient should receive antibiotic treatment to cover for Gram-negative bacteria and anaerobes. Once biliary flow is restored and cholangitis has settled, the cyst can be surgically removed in a second step. Answer to Question 2 Which Differential Diagnoses Should be Considered in a Patient With Cystic Liver Lesions? The main differential diagnoses in this patient with cystic show calcification. (Copyright W. Hosch, Department of Radiology, Hei- hepatic cyst and pseudocysts (necrotic cavity) in alveolar delberg University Hospital.) echinococcosis (E. multilocularis). Depending on the presence of systemic symptoms and signs and liquid versus solid cyst content, infectious causes TABLE Laboratory Results on Presentation like abscesses (bacterial, amoebic) or tuberculoma must be 50.1 considered. Parameter Patient Reference In addition, benign and malignant liver tumours or metastases are relevant differentials. AST (U/L) 145 <35 ALT (U/L) 454 <35 The Case Continued… GGT (U/L) 394 <55 ALP (U/L) 402 38–126 On ERC, biliary obstruction because of a cystobiliary fistula was found. CE cyst content was removed from the common Total bilirubin (μmol/L) 120 <19.0 bile duct and the bile flow was restored. The patient’s cho ESR (mm/h) 17 /40 10 /20 langitis was treated with ciprofloxacin and metronidazole. CRP (mg/L) 49 <5 Once the inflammation settled, the patient was referred for surgery and partial cystectomy was performed on both cysts. The patient has been followed up for 9 years after surgery Questions and has had no recurrence. He is considered cured and further follow-up visits are not needed. 1. What is the suspected diagnosis and how would you This case illustrates several learning points. In countries approach this patient? with low CE-endemicity provenance from a hyperendemic 2. Which differential diagnoses should be considered in a region is the single most important risk factor for CE in cystic patient with cystic liver lesions? liver lesions. CE is generally a benign disease with the exception of Discussion complicated cysts; in this case a cyst with biliary fistula. CE cysts are currently classified by the WHO into six stages: A young man of Turkish origin presents with right CE 1 and 2 (active), CE 3 a and 3 b (transitional) and CE 4 and upper quadrant pain and jaundice. He was diagnosed 5 (inactive). with CE 3 years earlier and has not been on any specific A very important question is which cysts can be left treatment. untreated and only observed (‘watch and wait’). There is fairly solid evidence that inactive CE 4 and CE 5 cysts can Answer to Question 1 be left untreated if they are not in critical sites. In this patient the cyst walls of both cysts (CE 1, CE 3 b) What is the Suspected Diagnosis and How Would were calcified (Figs. 50.1 and 50.2). Previously, calcification You Approach This Patient? was described only as a feature of CE 5 cysts; this was later His presentation should raise suspicion of a cystobiliary extended to CE 4 cysts and has now been shown to occur fistula with biliary obstruction, which is the most common in all cyst stages. acute complication in cystic echinococcosis and may be Retrospectively this case illustrates that surgical treatment complicated by bacterial cholangitis. was rightly offered to the patient at initial diagnosis. --- PAGE BREAK -- 140 Cystobiliary fistulas are some of the major reasons for activity. MRI or CT should be used when cysts are inaccessible by complications in CE of the liver (as are cystobronchial fistu- ultrasound. las in pulmonary CE). Fistulating cysts should be surgically Serology is hampered by a lack of sensitivity and specificity. treated before complications arise. The key question is how In unclear cases, diagnostic cyst puncture and aspiration may be performed by experienced examiners. If CE is suspected, to identify fistulas early to prevent complications. Previously, however, albendazole needs to be given peri-interventionally. endoscopic retrograde cholangiography (ERC) has been Generally, four treatment modalities are available: anthelmintic advocated as the method of choice. However, it has become treatment, percutaneous sterilization techniques, surgery and a evident that intracystic pressure may be too high for the con- ‘watch and wait’ approach. trast medium to enter. If available, MRI with magnetic res- Management of CE patients in general depends not only on the individual case but also on local resources and expertise. onance cholangiography (MRC) is an alternative option, Long-term follow-up is important to detect recurrence of with very good detection rates. disease. Further Reading SUMMARY BOX 1. Stojkovic M, Gottstein B, Junghanss T. Echinococcosis. Cystic Echinococcosis In: Farrar J, Hotez P, Junghanss T, Kang G, Lalloo D, White N, CE is an infection with the larval form of the dog tapeworm editors. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; Echinococcus granulosus. It occurs worldwide with high ende- 2013 [ micity in the Mediterranean basin, the Near and Middle East, 2. Hosch W, Stojkovic M, J€anisch T, et al. The role of calcification North and East Africa, central Asia and Latin America. for staging cystic echinococcosis (CE). Eur Radiol 2007;17:2538–45. Humans become infected by ingestion of eggs of E. 3. Stojkovic M, Zwahlen M, Teggi A, et al. Treatment response of cysgranulosus. tic echinococcosis to benzimidazoles: a systematic review. PLo S Symptoms may occur months to years after infection because Negl Trop Dis 2009;3(9):e 524. of mass effects of the growing cyst or because of complications. 4. WHO Informal Working Group. International classification of Liver (70 %) and lung (15–30 %) are the most commonly affected ultrasound images in cystic echinococcosis for application in clinical organs. Cyst complications include fistulas leading to biliary or and field epidemiological settings. Acta Trop 2003;85(2):253–61. bronchial obstruction, bacterial superinfection, cyst rupture leading to anaphylaxis, embolism of cyst content and compres- 5. Stojkovic M, Rosenberger KD, Steudle F, et al. Watch and wait sion syndromes. management of inactive cystic echinococcosis – does the path to Diagnosis of CE is based on imaging, mainly on ultrasound, inactivity matter – aalysis of a prospective patient cohort. PLo S which is crucial for the diagnosis and classification of disease Negl Trop Dis 2016;10(12):e 0005243.