51 A 34-Year-Old HIV-Positive Woman from Malawi With Slowly Progressive Half-Sided Weakness JURI KATCHANOV Clinical Presentation The neurological examination reveals a spastic hemiparesis on the left with hyperreflexia. The power in the left History leg is 2 /5 (active movement with gravity eliminated) and in her left arm 3 /5 (active movement against gravity). There A 34-year-old Malawian woman presents to a neurology outis a pronator drift on the left ( patient clinic in Malawi with slowly progressive weakness of weakness. Sensation of pain is reduced in her left leg and the left arm and leg. hand. The examination of her cranial nerves is normal. Her problems started approximately 3 months earlier when she first noticed a limp in her left leg. The weakness Laboratory Results progressed, and over the following weeks she also realized that her left arm was becoming affected. Full blood count: WBC 3.8 109 /L (reference range: 4–10), The patient is a poor historian and often has difficulty haemoglobin 9.9 g/d L (12–14), platelets 140 109 /L describing the onset and timing of sequential events, but (150–350). from her story it appears likely that the problems started Questions insidiously and have been slowly progressing since. She denies any head trauma, headache, recent episodes of fever, 1. What is your differential diagnosis? nausea, visual impairment or loss of weight. The review of 2. What is your diagnostic approach in a resource-limited systems is unremarkable. setting? The patient was diagnosed with smear-positive pulmonary tuberculosis 5 months earlier. At that time, she was also Discussion found to be HIV-reactive with a baseline CD 4 count of 54 /μL. She was started on antituberculous therapy, vitamin A 34-year-old HIV-positive woman from Malawi presents B , antiretroviral therapy and co-trimoxazole prophylaxis, all 6 with a 3-month history of progressive left-sided weakness of which she is currently taking. of insidious onset. She was diagnosed with pulmonary The patient works as a street vendor selling mobile phone vouchers. Despite her left-sided weakness she is still able to work sitting on a plastic chair and managing her vouchers and money with her right hand. She is divorced and does not have any children. She lives in an urban high-density area. Clinical Findings She is afebrile and her vital signs and general examination are normal apart from slightly pale conjunctivae. On fundoscopy her fundi are normal without any signs of papilloe- dema or retinitis. ness. The patient was asked to stretch out both arms and close her eyes. 141 --- PAGE BREAK -- 142 tuberculosis (TB) and HIV 5 months before her presenta- in HIV-positive patients. Clinicians may often find themtion. She is on antiretroviral therapy (ART), co-trimoxazole selves restricted to the pragmatic approach of ‘treating the prophylaxis and on antituberculous medication. On exami- treatable’. nation, there is a spastic hemiparesis on the left side with sen- If the patient is HIV-positive, a CD 4 count should be persory involvement. formed. Some FBLs are very unlikely if the CD 4 count is above 200 /μL, e. g. cryptococcoma or cerebral toxoplasmosis. Answer to Question 1 Cerebral TB can occur at any CD 4 count. PML mostly manifests in patients with advanced immunosuppression but has What is Your Differential Diagnosis? also been described in patients with higher CD 4 counts. The combination of spastic hemiparesis with hyperreflexia Serum antitoxoplasma Ig G and cryptococcal antigen and sensory impairment affecting one half of the body local- (Cr AG) are helpful, but may not be routinely available. izes the lesion to her brain. The onset appears subactute and Negative antitoxoplasma serology makes toxoplasmosis a the progression is slow. This makes ischaemic and haemor- very unlikely diagnosis, whereas a positive serological result rhagic lesions (‘strokes’) unlikely causes because they present documents past contact with the pathogen but fails to prove (hyper-)acutely and usually do not progress. Most likely the its relevance for the current illness. patient has one or several focal brain lesion (s). Sensitivity of CSF examination in FBL is low, and both The differential diagnosis of focal brain lesions (FBLs) in cryptococcoma and tuberculoma may present with a normal HIV-infected individuals in tropical countries is broad. CSF. However, if XPert MTB/RIF or Ziehl-Neelsen stain, Patients may suffer from HIV-related brain diseases such Cr Ag, India Ink or fungal cultures are available, these tests as cerebral toxoplasmosis, progressive multifocal leukoence- should be done and might help establish the diagnosis. phalopathy, CNS lymphoma, cryptococcoma and CMV Chest radiography and abdominal ultrasound are useful encephalitis. Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection of the because they may reveal tuberculous lesions, metastases or brain parenchyma can present as tuberculoma or tuberculous a primary neoplasm. abscess. Cerebral imaging plays an important role in diagnosing Furthermore, HIV-positive individuals may suffer from FBLs; however, availability is extremely limited in conditions primarily unrelated to their HIV infection such resource-constrained settings. CT may at times produce as a brain tumour, brain metastases or a cerebral abscess. non-specific results confirming the clinical diagnosis of an Endemic ‘tropical’ diseases such as neurocysticercosis, FBL but failing to assist the clinician in narrowing down neuroschistosomiasis or, in Latin America, Chagas’ disease, the spectrum of differential diagnoses. MRI is more informacan also present with focal brain lesions and should be tive; however, it is practically unavailable as a routine invesconsidered according to the local epidemiological pattern. tigation in tropical low- and middle-income settings. Cystic In this particular case, the patient developed a focal brain lesions on CT are indicative of neurocysticercosis. Cerebral lesion 2 months after starting ART. Central nervous system oedema with mass effect and contrast enhancement would disorders are common after ART initiation. It is thought that favour cerebral abscess, tuberculoma, toxoplasmosis and the recovering immune system may ‘unmask’ or ‘paradoxi- CNS lymphoma, whereas PML classically shows no mass cally deteriorate’ pre-existing CNS infections. This phenom- effect and no enhancement. Meningeal enhancement is enon is called immune reconstitution inflammatory typical for tuberculosis. syndrome (IRIS) and, depending on the type, is termed ‘unmasking’ or ‘paradoxical’ IRIS. The Case Continued… Tuberculoma, progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) and cryptococcoma have been well documented Routine CSF examination was normal, India Ink stain and in the context of IRIS. Toxoplasmosis has been described fungal cultures were negative. The patient was started on after ART initiation, even in patients on co-trimoxazole empirical antitoxoplasmosis treatment with high-dose co-triprophylaxis. moxazole. ART and antituberculous treatment were contin Of note, our patient was diagnosed with TB at the time of ued. Prednisolone 1 mg/kg bodyweight was added to cover ART initiation and CNS tuberculosis can deteriorate after for presumed IRIS. The patient was put on a waiting list ART introduction as well as after commencement of TB for a cerebral MRI scan, which was available thanks to a local treatment. research project. On 4-week follow-up her clinical status was unchanged. Answer to Question 2 At 8 weeks there was further deterioration of power in her left hand. An MRI of her head was done which showed multi What is Your Diagnostic Approach in a Resourcefocal T 2 hyperintense lesions exclusively affecting the white Limited Setting? matter and more prominent in the right hemisphere (frontal The diagnostic work-up of FBLs in a resource-limited and temporal lobes). Furthermore, there was a small area setting primarily depends on the availability of investiga- of demyelination in the left cerebellar peduncle. These tions. It often remains mainly clinical, guided by epidemio- radiological findings were deemed strongly suggestive logical evidence and by the degree of immunosuppression of PML. --- PAGE BREAK -- lobe. (B) Cranial MRI showing bilateral T 2 hyperintense (to grey matter) lesions in the subcortical white matter involving the so-called U-fibres resulting in a “scalloped appearance”. (Courtesy Dr Eberhard Siebert, University Medical Center Charitè, Berlin, Germany) A presumed diagnosis of PML was made. The patient was The only treatment showing benefit in PML patients with HIV referred to a local rehabilitation centre for walking aids. The is ART. Prognosis before introduction of ART was poor, and only local palliative care team was involved. 10 % of PML patients survived for 1 year. However, in the ART era the 1-year survival rate has increased dramatically to 50 %. SUMMARY BOX PML occurring within the first months of ART is often described as PML–immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (PML–IRIS). Of note, PML–IRIS possibly accounts for Progressive Multifocal Leukoencephalopathy nearly 25 % of all PML cases in HIV-positive patients. Steroids PML is caused by a reactivation of the human JC polyomavirus. might have a beneficial effect in the management of PML–IRIS. JC stands for ‘John Cunningham’, the first patient from whom However, in a setting with high prevalence of HIV-associated the virus was isolated. JC polyomavirus is neurotropic, affecting opportunistic infections and tuberculosis, it is probably advisable oligodendrocytes. to apply steroids only if other common CNS infections are PML always occurs as a result of virus reactivation because excluded or covered for. of immunosuppression. Primary infection usually takes place during childhood and the virus remains quiescent in the kidneys, bone marrow and lymphoid tissue. Upon reactivation, a pro Further Reading ductive infection of brain oligodendrocytes results in demyelination. The presenting symptoms include muscle weakness, sensory deficits, hemianopia, cognitive dysfunction, aphasia, 1. Heckmann JE, Bhigjee AI. Tropical neurology. In: Farrar J, editor. and coordination and gait difficulties. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 On imaging, multiple lesions are located in the subcortical [ white matter and cerebellar peduncles. The lesions look hypo- 2. Asselman V, Thienemann F, Pepper DJ, et al. Central nervous sysdense on CT ( ( Besides its importance as an opportunistic infection in 3. Grebenciucova E, Berger JR. Progressive multifocal leukoencephaadvanced HIV infection, PML in recent years has increasingly lopathy. Neurol Clin 2018;36(4):739–50. been described in other contexts of immunosuppression e. g. in 4. Modi M, Mochan A, Modi G. Management of HIV-associated transplant patients or patients treated with immunemodulatory drugs. focal brain lesions in developing countries. QJM 2004;97 (7):413–21.