53 A 24-Year-Old Woman from Uganda With Fever and Shock BENJAMIN JEFFS Answer to Question 1 Clinical Presentation What Are Your Differential Diagnoses? History The presentation is non-specific and a wide range of acute A 24-year-old woman presents to a small hospital in rural infectious diseases are possible. Uganda because of a 5-day history of a febrile illness. Apart Both malaria and typhoid fever present with non-specific from fever, the illness started with a sore throat and aching all symptoms and a septic picture, but neither would cause conover. She also developed some abdominal pain and diar- junctivitis. Other causes of bacterial sepsis, including invarhoea. The patient has become increasingly unwell over sive meningococcal disease have to be considered. the course of the past days. She is very weak and needs help A severe viral infection with an adenovirus or influenza to stand. would be possible but the patient appears slightly too unwell Her husband died of a severe febrile illness 6 days before for this. Measles commonly presents with pronounced conshe became ill. He had worked in a local gold mine and had junctivitis, but at this stage one would see a rash. Zika virus previously been in good health. He had fallen ill about a week was discovered in Uganda and presents with conjunctivitis, before his death. His wife had looked after him during his but usually is a mild viral illness and does not cause shock. final illness and he had died at home. The fact that the patient’s husband has recently died of a similar severe febrile illness should raise the suspicion of a viral haemorrhagic fever (VHF). Marburg virus disease Clinical Findings (MVD) has been associated with mines. The patient looks very unwell. Her blood pressure is 85 /65 mm Hg, pulse rate 105 bpm, temperature 38°C Answer to Question 2 (100.4°F). She has bilateral conjunctivitis. There is no rash How Would You Approach the Patient and What and no lymphadenopathy. The heart sounds are normal and Tests Would You Do? her chest is clear. Her abdominal examination is normal. The patient should be treated with extreme caution because Questions of the possibility of a viral haemorrhagic fever. Nosocomial spread of these diseases can cause hospital outbreaks with a 1. What are your differential diagnoses? high case fatality rate. The patient should ideally be isolated 2. How would you approach the patient and what tests in a side room. Blood tests should be kept to a minimum to would you do? reduce the risk to laboratory staff. Protective clothing, such as gloves and a surgical gown, are recommended during proce Discussion dures. The risk of transmission of VHF viruses from a malaria slide is very low once the blood spot is dry; therefore A young Ugandan woman presents to a rural hospital with a it would be reasonable to do a malaria slide or a rapid diagsevere febrile illness. She is hypotensive and has bilateral con- nostic test. However, the prevalence of Plasmodium falcijunctivitis. Her husband has recently died after a short febrile parum parasitaemia in Uganda is high and a positive slide illness. would not rule out VHF. 147 --- PAGE BREAK -- 148 positive Marburg virus PCR result came back. Had this been known while she was in the hospital, stricter infection control procedures, including double gloves, a mask, goggles and a disposable (waterproof) surgical gown, would have been appropriate. Her family members, close friends and medical staff were Sudan interviewed; anyone who had had physical contact with her, or her body fluids, was told to monitor their temperature for 21 days from the time of contact which is the maximum incubation period for MHF. Anyone who developed a fever or became unwell during this period was isolated. SUMMARY BOX Cote d'ivoire Gabon Uganda Republic of the Congo Filoviral Diseases Kenya Democratic Republic Marburg virus disease (MVD) and Ebola virus disease (EVD) are of the Congo both caused by filoviruses. They are clinically virtually indistinguishable and cause severe illnesses with a high case fatality rate. Angola Symptoms are non-specific, and patients may present with fever, sore throat, general body ache, retrosternal chest pain and abdominal symptoms. Conjunctivitis is common. The most frequent cause of death is shock. Less than half of those who die develop haemorrhages because of disseminated intravascular coagulation. Zimbabwe Because symptoms are non-specific and testing is difficult in most of Africa, filoviral haemorrhagic fevers (FHF) are normally recognized only if a cluster of cases occurs. In particular, an haemorrhagic fever are shown. Countries where Ebola and Marburg raise the suspicion towards FHF. haemorrhagic fevers have been seen are indicated in green and blue, EVD and MVD have both been detected over wide areas of respectively, with countries in red indicating documentation of both dis- sub-Saharan Africa. Both are zoonoses of bats. Many cases of eases. Incidence and risk of disease may vary significantly within each MHF have been linked to entering or working in caves or mines, country. Filoviruses are likely to occur outside these countries but have whereas cases of EHF are associated with butchering and eating not yet been recognised. (Reproduced from Farrar, J., Hotez, P., apes or monkeys. Junghanss, T., et al., 2013. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. Farrar, J., Filoviruses can spread between people through direct physi Ed. London: Elsevier. outbreaks involving the death of large numbers of medical staff have been recorded. Therefore strict infection control measures To protect laboratory staff all biochemical and haematoshould be followed while caring for anyone with a suspected viral logical tests should be done using near-patient testing if haemorrhagic fever. Vaccines against MVD are under developpossible. ment but have not yet been tested on humans. The public health authorities should be alerted to the pos- The preferred method of testing for MVD is with PCR, antigen detection tests are less sensitive and specific. The treatment of sibility of a case of viral haemorrhagic fever. Ideally testing for MVD is supportive. Treatments which have shown promise in this should be organized, but samples are likely to need spe EVD, such as antibody therapies e. g. ZMAPP or the antiviral drug cial shipping arrangements to be taken to a specialized favipiravir, have not been clinically tested in humans with MVD. laboratory. Further Reading The Case Continued… 1. Blumberg L, Enria D, Bausch DG. Viral Haemorrhagic Fevers. A presumed diagnosis of Marburg virus disease was made. The In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. malaria slide showed a low level of parasitaemia with P. falci- London: Elsevier; 2013 [ parum. A sample for Marburg and Ebola PCR was sent in a 2. Emanuel J, Marzi A, Feldmann H. Filoviruses: Ecology, Molecular sealed plastic container. The patient was isolated in a side Biology, and Evolution. Adv Virus Res 2018;100:189–221 [chaproom and all patient contact was carried out while wearing ter 9]. 3. Bauer MP, Timen A, Vossen ACTM, et al. Marburg haemorrhagic gloves. She was treated with IV artesunate and then artefever in returning travellers: an overview aimed at clinicians. Clin mether/lumefantrine. She was given empirical IV ceftriaxone Microbiol Infect 2019;21:e 28–e 31. to cover for possible sepsis and was resuscitated with IV fluids. 4. World Health Organization. Clinical management of patients with Over the next few days the patient remained very unwell, viral haemorrhagic fever, a pocket guide for front-line health workers, then she started to improve. Once she had recovered, she was ISBN 978 92 4 154960 8 (NLM classification: WC 534). http:// kept in isolation for an additional 2 days and was then apps. who. int/medicinedocs/documents/s 22501 en/s 22501 en. pdf. allowed to return home. The day after her discharge a