55 A 40-Year-Old Male Farmer from Peru With Chronic Cough and Weight Loss FREDERIQUE JACQUERIOZ AND CARLOS SEAS Laboratory Results Clinical Presentation Platelets: 1093 109 /L (reference range: 150–450); the rest History of the full blood count is within normal limits. A 40-year-old farmer from the Peruvian Amazon is referred to a hospital in the capital, Lima, with a 4-month history of Questions chronic productive cough and chest pain. The patient reports dyspnoea on exertion and weight loss of about 20 kg. He 1. What are your differential diagnoses? denies diarrhoea, fever or night sweats. 2. How would you approach this patient? Three and half months earlier, the patient was hospitalized at a regional hospital in the Peruvian Amazon for similar Discussion complaints. During the hospitalization, three sputum smears for acid-fast bacilli (AFB) were reported negative. No tuber A male farmer from the Peruvian Amazon presents with a hisculin skin test was performed. The chest radiograph was tory of chronic cough and weight loss. After 3 months of TB described as abnormal but no report is available and the treatment for a presumptive diagnosis of pulmonary tubercupatient does not have the film. A diagnosis of pulmonary losis, he shows no clinical improvement. The patient is cachectuberculosis (TB) was made based on clinical presentation tic with cervical lymphadenopathy and abnormal pulmonary and abnormal chest radiographic findings. The patient auscultation. Laboratory investigations show thrombocytosis. received first line TB therapy consisting of isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide and ethambutol. Answer to Question 1 In the following months, despite adherence to treatment, What Are Your Differential Diagnoses? he showed no clinical improvement and reported persis The most important differential diagnoses in the given settence of productive cough with streaking of blood in the ting are MDR TB, histoplasmosis and paracoccidioidomycosputum. He was then referred to Lima with a suspected sis. TB is highly endemic in Peru and MDR TB is an diagnosis of multi-drug resistant TB (MDR TB) for further increasing issue. TB and MDR TB almost always need to work-up. be considered when clinical symptoms and evolution, as in The patient had been found to be HTLV-1-positive this case, are suggestive of the disease. What would be 10 years previously. A recent HIV ELISA test was negative. unusual about this patient is his origin from a rural area in The patient denies recent travels. the central Peruvian Amazon where MDR TB is still uncommon in comparison with underprivileged districts of Lima and other big cities of Peru. Clinical Findings Histoplasmosis can present with recurrent or progressive A 40-year-old man appears fatigued and cachectic. Temper- pulmonary symptoms that can mimic TB. However, his ature 37.2°C (98.96°F), blood pressure 120 /75 mm Hg, presentation would suggest a chronic form that is more often pulse 70 bpm regular, respiratory rate 15 breaths per seen in individuals with preexisting chronic obstructive minute. On inspection, few cervical and retroauricular pulmonary disease, which this patient does not have. The lymph nodes are palpable, which are small, mobile, soft patient’s age, gender, occupation, origin and clinical sympand non-tender. Lungs: crackles and rhonchi bilaterally. toms with a pulmonary focus are all typical of the chronic No hepatosplenomegaly. The rest of the physical examina- form of paracoccidioidomycosis and make this diagnosis tion is normal. the most likely of the three. Co-infection of TB (non-MDR) 152 --- PAGE BREAK -- rounding smaller buds around (arrows) seen on KOH preparation of the patient’s sputum. infiltrates predominantly in the central and upper zones of both lungs. Cavities are seen in the right lung. There is no hilar lymphadenopathy. MTB/RIF) for M. tuberculosis. Mycobacterial culture should complete the evaluation and, if positive, culture-based drug sensitivity testing should be added. Locally endemic fungal and paracoccidioidomycosis are not uncommon and should infections (e. g. histoplasmosis and paracoccidioidomycosis) also be kept in mind as a possible differential. Parasitic infecshould be evaluated by direct examination of sputum with tions such as paragonimiasis or pulmonary hydatid cyst are wet mount potassium hydroxide (KOH) preparation and also possible diagnoses, though less common. Imaging (chest cultures. Depending on chest radiographic findings, local radiography and CT scan) will help identifying the typical availability and costs, a CT scan of the chest could be conlesions of these infections. sidered as well as bronchoscopy with biopsy if less invasive diagnostic evaluation is unrevealing. The thrombocytosis Answer to Question 2 should be confirmed on a smear. How Would You Approach this Patient? The first step in this patient is to evaluate him for MDR TB. The Case Continued… Initial investigations should include chest radiography (the The tuberculin skin test was negative as were two AFB smears. patient should also be asked to bring the initial chest x-ray The chest x-ray showed bilateral confluent reticulonodular and report for comparison), tuberculin skin test (PPD) infiltrates and multiple cavities in the right lung ( and repeated AFB sputum smears and sputum-PCR (Xpert TABLE Differences Between the Main Clinical Forms of Paracoccidioidomycosis 55.1 Paracoccidioidomycosis Chronic (Adult) Form Acute (Juvenile) Form Epidemiology >90 % of cases <10 % of cases Infected Population Men >30 years old Children and young adults, both sexes (male:female ratio 14:1) HIV patients (rare) Clinical Characteristics Chronic Acute or sub-acute Slow progression Rapidly progressive Reactivation years after initial Develops after recent exposure exposure Lung (always) Systemic disease of reticuloendothelial system with dissemination Dissemination to liver and lymph from lung to liver, spleen, lymph nodes and bone marrow nodes can occur Mucosal lesions (rarely) Mucocutaneous lesions ( 70 %) HIV patients: similar plus cutaneous lesions and severe pulmonary (face, nasal and oral cavity) involvement Differential Diagnoses Mimics other chronic fungal Mimics leukaemia, lymphoma, severe disseminated TB infections and pulmonary TB Treatment Azoles (itraconazole) Azoles (itraconazole) Co-trimoxazole Amphotericin B (HIV or severe disease) --- PAGE BREAK -- 154 Examination of his sputum (KOH preparation) revealed the culture. The identification of P. brasiliensis is more difficult in characteristic yeast forms of Paracoccidioides brasiliensis sputum than in skin lesions or material from lymph nodes. The ( A diagnosis of chronic (adult) paracoccidioidomycosis was culture is difficult and takes 20 to 30 days. Serological testing is useful for antibody detection and diagnosis, assessing disease made. The thrombocytosis was considered reactive to the severity and monitoring treatment response. Molecular methods underlying chronic infection. Given the extensive pulmonary could be used instead of culture to confirm the diagnosis but are lesions and HTLV-1 co-infection, the patient was started on not yet widely available in resource-limited endemic areas. amphotericin B followed by itraconazole (as opposed to itra- Treatment includes azoles for mild and moderate cases. conazole alone). TB treatment was discontinued. Itraconazole (200 mg/day for 12 months) is considered the drug of choice. Voriconazole and co-trimoxazole are Our patient was HTLV-1 positive. His symptoms were alternatives; the latter is commonly used in Brazil. Amphotericin B confined to the lungs as in the chronic adult form of paracoc- (cumulative dose of 1–2 g) is indicated for severe and cidioidomycosis (see Summary Box), but his pulmonary extensive disease. However, the drug is not curative and should lesions were unusually extensive. His long-term prognosis be followed by an azole or co-trimoxazole to complete depends on the extent of pulmonary fibrotic sequelae. 12 months’ treatment. Cure is determined based upon four criteria: clinical (i. e. absence of symptoms), mycological (i. e. negative testing), SUMMARY BOX radiological (i. e. stability of lung lesions on x-ray for 1 year) and immunological (i. e. decrease of specific antibodies). Paracoccidioidomycosis Recently case reports of severe and unusual extrapulmonary manifestations of paracoccidioidomycosis have been described Paracoccidioidomycosis is a systemic fungal infection endemic in HTLV-1 infected patients and the two conditions might be only to the moist tropical regions of Latin America. The infection is caused by the thermally dimorphic fungus Paracoccidioides associated. brasiliensis, which grows as mould in the environment and as yeast in tissue and at 37°C. Humans are infected through the Further Reading inhalation of aerosolized conidia (spores) from the soil. In endemic areas, initial exposure occurs in childhood and the majority of 1. Hay RJ. Fungal infections. In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical primary infections remain asymptomatic or subclinical. In those Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 [ who develop disease, two main clinical forms are observed (Table 55.1). The chronic adult form is characterized by pulmo- 2. Morejon KM, Machado AA, Martinez R. Paracoccidioidomycosis nary symptoms that slowly develop over months, typically in in patients infected with and not infected with human immunodemiddle-aged men living in rural endemic areas, which are often ficiency virus: a case-control study. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2009; accompanied by mucosal lesions. Women of fertile age are rarely 80(3):359–66. affected, probably because of a protective effect of oestradiol 3. León M, Alave J, Bustamante B, et al. Human T lymphotropic virus preventing the transformation of the fungus into the yeast stage. 1 and paracoccidioidomycosis: a probable association in Latin The acute juvenile form is seen in children and young adults of America. Clin Infect Dis 2010;51(2):250–1. both sexes and presents as an acute systemic disease of the 4. Mendes RP, Cavalcante RS, Marques SA, et al. Paracoccidioidomyreticuloendothelial system. Adult patients with advanced HIV cosis: Current Perspectives from Brazil. Open Microbiol J 2017;11: infection present a more aggressive acute disease similar to the 224–82. juvenile acute form with extensive pulmonary involvement. Diagnosis is confirmed by visualization of P. brasiliensis (yeast 5. Quieroz-Tellez F, Fahal AH, Falci DR, et al. Neglected Endemic form) on wet preparation of specimen and/or isolation in fungal Mycoses. Lancet Infect Dis 2017;17:e 367–77.