57 A 37-Year-Old Woman from Malawi With Haematemesis CAMILLA ROTHE Clinical Presentation Discussion History A Malawian woman presents with a first episode of haematemesis. She has neither taken NSAIDs nor alcohol. On A 37-year-old woman from the Lower Shire Valley in southexamination she is afebrile, slightly pale, shocked and has ern Malawi is referred from a clinic on one of the local sugar an enlarged spleen. Her abdomen is non-tender. Her full plantations to the district hospital. She has vomited blood blood count shows pancytopenia with normocytic anaemia. three times over the past 24 hours. The blood is bright red in colour. There is no epigastric pain and no previous history of vomiting. There is no history of fever or abnormal Answer to Question 1 bleeding and her stool has been normal in colour. Before What is the Most Likely Cause of Her the onset of symptoms, she was fine. She has not taken Haematemesis? any regular painkillers and does not drink any alcohol. Her past medical history is unremarkable. She lives and Splenomegaly and pancytopenia point towards the presence works on a large sugar plantation in the area. She is married of portal hypertension and she is most likely to bleed from with three children, all are well. An HIV test done 3 months gastro-oesophageal varices. In one series from Malawi, the previously was negative. presence of splenomegaly in patients with upper gastrointestinal bleeding was the single most specific clinical criterion to distinguish between a variceal bleed and a haemorrhage of Clinical Findings other origin. 37-year-old woman who is slim but not wasted. Conjuncti- Furthermore, portal hypertension is the most common vae are slightly pale, but there are no subconjunctival effu- cause of upper gastrointestinal bleeding in parts of subsions and she is not jaundiced. Her blood pressure is 90 / Saharan Africa, accounting for more than 50 % of bleeds 60 mm Hg, pulse 110 bpm, respiratory rate 28 breath cycles in some series. The reason for this remains only partly underper minute, and she is afebrile. stood. The prevalence of chronic viral hepatitis or alcohol On examination of the abdomen there is no abdominal dis- abuse is not higher in the affected regions than elsewhere tension and no tenderness. The spleen is palpable at 10 cm in the tropical world. below the left costal margin. The liver is slightly enlarged but However, Malawi and other countries in the region are there are no stigmata of chronic liver disease. There is no shifting highly endemic for schistosomiasis. Virtually all water bodies dullness and no peripheral oedema. Her lymph nodes are not enlarged. The rest of the physical examination is normal. TABLE Laboratory Results on Admission Laboratory Results 57.1 Parameter Patient Reference Range Her laboratory results on admission are shown in Table 57.1. WBC ( 109 /L) 2.8 4–10 Questions Haemoglobin (g/d L) 8.3 12–14 1. What is the most likely cause of her haematemesis? MCV (f L) 88 80–99 2. What further investigations would you like to do to Platelets ( 109 /L) 130 150–400 establish the diagnosis? 157 --- PAGE BREAK -- 158 in the country are infested with both Schistosoma mansoni and S. haematobium and it is likely that a high prevalence of hepatosplenic schistosomiasis with periportal fibrosis may explain why portal hypertension is so common in the region. Little is known about causes of liver cirrhosis other than hepatitis B and C and their contribution to the burden of disease (e. g. autoimmune hepatitis, primary biliary cirrhosis, primary sclerosing cholangitis, haemochromatosis or Wilson’s disease). Other aetiologies of gastrointestinal bleeding, such as peptic ulcer disease, erosive gastritis or a bleeding tumour are less likely and would not explain her splenomegaly. Notably though, in sub-Saharan Africa oesophageal cancer is strikingly common in young adults in their third and fourth decade of life. Risk factors remain poorly understood. Progressive dysphagia rather than haematemesis is usually the presenting symptom. Patients with visceral leishmaniasis (VL) can present with splenomegaly and pancytopenia. However, in VL there is Prof. Joachim Richter). usually a history of fever, and the patient’s platelet count is only slightly diminished, which cannot explain her bleed. VL, furthermore, is uncommon in Southern Africa, even The Case Continued… though few sporadic cases have been described from the region. The patient received IV fluids and was taken to the nearest central hospital for endoscopy. The presence of oesophageal varices was confirmed and banding was done. There was no Answer to Question 2 other source of bleeding. Hepatitis B and C serologies were What Additional Investigations Would You Like to negative. One stool sample for S. mansoni ova was negative. Do to Establish the Diagnosis? However, on ultrasound of the liver a pattern typical of In a resource-constrained setting, very limited options may be pipestem fibrosis was described. The patient received a single available to establish more than just a syndromic diagnosis. dose of praziquantel 40 mg/kg. She was discharged home. The patient should be taken for gastroduodenoscopy without delay to detect and treat the source of bleeding. SUMMARY BOX In case of oesophageal varices, an experienced ultrasonographer with a reasonable ultrasound machine would be able to distinguish between liver cirrhosis and periportal ‘pipestem’ Hepatosplenic Schistosomiasis fibrosis as seen in hepatic schistosomiasis ( infection with Schistosoma mansoni, S. japonicum or S. mekongi. biopsy would be the most helpful tool to distinguish between Only about 10 % of people chronically infected with schistocirrhosis and periportal fibrosis in case of schistosomiasis. It is somiasis develop late-stage disease. Risk factors for disease usually unavailable, and it is risky in an environment where progression remain poorly understood. Apart from intensity and postinterventional monitoring is poor, and possible compli- duration of infection, host genetic factors such as ethnic cations such as intra-abdominal bleeds are likely to go background and IFN-gamma polymorphism, variable degrees of semi-immunity and parasite strain differences may play a role. undetected. Chronic infection with liver-pathogenic Schistosoma species Other investigations to diagnose schistosomiasis will lack results in periportal fibrosis and portal venous hypertension. One sensitivity and/or specificity in the endemic setting. The exception is S. intercalatum, which occurs focally in Central and demonstration of Schistosoma eggs in the stool is challenging West Africa and causes granulomatous inflammation of the liver in advanced disease and several samples would have to be without portal hypertension. Patients may present with symptoms of hypersplenism, such examined which is commonly not feasible. The circulating as abdominal discomfort and fatigue secondary to progressive cathodic antigen test (CCA) is a urine rapid diagnostic test anaemia. Ascites is uncommon because of the preserved based on antigens regurgitated by adult flukes. Its sensitivity hepatocellular function but may occur in advanced disease or decreases when the worm burden is low, as may be the case in in coexisting liver cirrhosis. advanced disease; but it is highly specific and – other than The classical clinical signs of liver cirrhosis (e. g. gynaecoserology – the CCA test is able to distinguish between active mastia, palmar erythema, alterations in distribution of body hair) are absent in schistosomiasis. and past infection. A common, primary presenting sign of hepatosplenic Hepatitis B or C serologies should be done; other inves- schistosomiasis is upper gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding from tigations for chronic liver disease are usually unavailable. gastro-oesophageal varices. In some endemic countries in --- PAGE BREAK -- sub-Saharan Africa half or more of upper GI bleeds are caused (TIPS) may be beneficial for the prevention of variceal bleeding in by portal hypertension. hepatic schistosomiasis. The demonstration of Schistosoma eggs in the stool can be challenging in advanced disease because the adult flukes may Further Reading have long died and egg production may have stopped. Experienced ultrasonographers may be able to detect the typical pattern of ‘pipestem fibrosis’. The term refers to the 1. Bustindy AL, King CH. Schistosomiasis. In: Farrar J, editor. macroscopic aspect of the liver which shows wide bands of Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 fibrosis around portal tracts resembling the stems of a clay pipe. [ If available, liver biopsy may show ova of Schistosoma species 2. Harries AD, Wirima JJ. Upper gastrointestinal bleeding in Malaalong with proliferation of fibrous tissue in and around the wian adults and value of splenomegaly in predicting source of portal tract. haemorrhage. East Afr Med J 1989;66(2):97–9. Praziquantel may have an effect in treatment of early fibrosis, 3. Wolf LL, Ibrahim R, Miao C, et al. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy but has little role to play in advanced disease. Nevertheless, in a public referral hospital in Lilongwe, Malawi: spectrum of disa single dose treatment with praziquantel 40 mg/kg may be given to stop the progression of fibrosis and reduce the worm burden ease and associated risk factors. World J Surg 2012;36(5):1074–82. and further egg production. 4. Colley DG, Bustinduy AL, Secor WE, et al. Human schistosomi Treatment of variceal bleeding includes endoscopic asis. Lancet 2014;383(9936):2253–64. sclerotherapy, band-ligation and devascularization surgery. 5. Richter J, Bode JG, Blondin G, et al. Severe liver fibrosis caused by Splenectomy is not recommended in tropical settings, because Schistosoma mansoni: management and treatment with a transjuof the increased susceptibility to malaria and bacterial infections. gular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt. Lancet Infect Dis 2015;15: Studies on the use of non-selective beta-blockers for 731–7. prophylaxis of upper GI bleed in hepatic schistosomiasis have yielded controversial results. A few reports from resource-rich settings seem to indicate that the placement of a transjugular intrahepatic portovenous shunt