58 A 25-Year-Old Woman from Egypt With Severe Chronic Diarrhoea and Malabsorption THOMAS WEITZEL AND NADIA EL-DIB Clinical Presentation History A 25-year-old woman from Bani Suwaif in Upper Egypt (115 km south of Cairo) presents to a hospital in Cairo complaining of severe diarrhoea for 2 months accompanied by weight loss of about 15 kg and amenorrhoea. The symptoms started with stomach rumbles and colicky abdominal pain; later on, she suffered anorexia and vomiting. The diarrhoea is voluminous, not related to meals, and occurs both during the day and at night (five to ten times in 24 hours). She received various antibiotics, including metronidazole, as well as antidiarrhoeal drugs, without any improvement. During the last month she has developed lower limb swelling and severe prostration. Egypt with chronic diarrhoea. Clinical Findings The patient appears generally unwell; she is pale and has angular stomatitis. She is afebrile, heart rate 100 bpm, blood TABLE pressure 100 /60 mm Hg, scaphoid abdomen with borbo- Laboratory Results on Admission 58.1 rygmi, pitting oedema of the lower limbs, and decreased Parameter Patient Reference skin turgor. Potassium (mmol/L) 2.8 3.5–5 Laboratory Results Sodium (mmol/L) 127 136–145 Calcium, total (mmol/L) 2.1 2.25–2.63 Laboratory results are summarized in Table 58.1. D-xylose test shows evidence of malabsorption. On stool microscopy, Albumin (g/L) 23 35–55 numerous helminth ova are detected ( WBC ( 109 /L) 6.6 3.8–11 Questions Eosinophil count ( 109 /L) 0.53 <0.45 1. Which helminth is causing the patient’s clinical problems Platelets ( 109 /L) 350 150–350 and why is it able to cause such severe infections? Creatinine (μmol/L) 115 53–106 2. Where does this parasite occur and how is it transmitted? 160 --- PAGE BREAK -- Discussion A 25-year-old woman from Upper Egypt presents with severe chronic diarrhoea and colicky abdominal pain. She is afebrile but shows clinical signs of chronic malabsorption. Full blood count reveals mild eosinophilia, blood chemistry shows electrolyte derangement and hypoalbuminaemia. Stool samples yield peanut-shaped helminth eggs. Answer to Question 1 Which Helminth is Causing the Patient’s Clinical Problems and Why is it Able to Cause Such Severe Infections? The peanut-shaped eggs spotted on stool microscopy are typical ova of Capillaria philippinensis. The patient’s complaints are very compatible with intestinal capillariasis, and she resides in an endemic area. In contrast to most other intes- tinal helminths, C. philippinensis is able to multiply within treatment with mebendazole. the intestine of its final host causing long-lasting infection recently has been transferred to the genus Paracapillaria. and severe clinical manifestations. Humans are accidentally infected when eating raw or undercooked small fresh- or brackish-water fish harbouring infective larval stages of the parasite. Adult parasites invade the wall of the small intestine and live partially embedded in the mucosa of Answer to Question 2 jejunum and ileum. The unique life cycle includes an alteration of Where Does this Parasite Occur and How is it oviparous and larviparous females. Oviparous females shed Transmitted? thick-shelled eggs, which exit the body with the stool and, after being eaten by small fish, develop into the infective larvae. Lar C. philippinensis is endemic in various East and South-east viparous females contain thin-shelled eggs, which mainly hatch Asian countries such as The Philippines, Thailand, Laos, in utero and permit an internal autoinfection and multiplication cycle, i. e. larvae develop into adults within the intestinal mucosa China, Korea, Japan and Taiwan. Furthermore, cases have without leaving the host. This leads to a gradual increase of both been reported from Egypt, Iran and India. Sporadic cases worm burden and severity of clinical manifestations. With its may occur elsewhere. One indigenous case has been reported autoinfection cycle, the parasite is one of the few intestinal helfrom Cuba and another patient acquired the infection most minths causing chronic and life-threatening infections. Patients probably in Colombia. Capillariasis is transmitted through present with colicky abdominal pain and intermittent or chronic diarrhoea accompanied by anorexia, vomiting and dehydration. consumption of raw or undercooked fish. Without treatment, infection progresses to severe enteropathy with crypt atrophy and flattening of villi. Chronically infected patients suffer cachexia and pitting oedema of the lower limbs. The Case Continued… Untreated, they may eventually die of severe protein loss, electrolyte imbalance and concomitant bacterial infections. Parasitological diagnosis relies on the demonstration of typical peanut The patient was admitted to hospital. Albendazole was shaped eggs in stool samples, which have protruding polar plugs initiated at a dose of 400 mg bd and continued for on both ends and measure 36 to 42 20 μm. Treatment is with 3 weeks. Oral and parenteral fluids and electrolytes were mebendazole or albendazole for 20 or 10 days, respectively. given for resuscitation, and she received a high protein diet and vitamins. During the first days of treatment, Further Reading numerous adult helminths (length 3–5 mm) were found in more stool samples ( condition improved significantly within the first week Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 and vomiting stopped. Diarrhoea subsided after 2 weeks [Appendix 3]. of treatment. 2. El-Dib N, Weitzel T. Capilariasis intestinal. In: Apt W, editor. Parasitología Humana. Mc Graw-Hill; 2013 [ SUMMARY BOX 3. Attia RAH, Tolba MEM, Yones DA, et al. Capillaria philippinensis in Upper Egypt: has it become endemic? Am J Trop Med Hyg Intestinal Capillariasis 2012;86(1):126–33. 4. Cross JH. Intestinalcapillariasis. Clin Microbiol Rev 1992;5(2):120–9. Intestinal capillariasis is a zoonotic disease caused by C. philippinensis, a tiny nematode usually infecting fish-eating birds, which