59 A 24-Year-Old Man from Malawi With Skin Lesions and Breathlessness M. JANE BATES Clinical Presentation History A 24-year-old Malawian businessman presents to your clinic having noticed dark spots on his arm and leg for the last month. The lesions are progressing and he is now getting facial swelling. On questioning, he also reports a 3-month history of cough and worsening shortness of breath. He has no constitutional symptoms of weight loss, fevers or night sweats. His cough is productive of white sputum. He has no history of previous tuberculosis. He tested positive for HIV a week before coming to your clinic and has not yet started antiretroviral medication. Clinical Findings The patient appears comfortable at rest with moderate facial oedema ( nose of the patient. ratory rate 32 breath cycles per minute and pulse 102 bpm. Widespread dark-purplish plaques are noted on the skin ( decreased air entry and dullness at the right lung base. He has swelling of his right leg from the foot to the knee, with prominent dark plaques which are coalescing ( The rest of the physical examination is normal. Questions 1. What are your most important differential diagnoses? 2. How would you approach this patient? Discussion A young Malawian man presents with widespread dark purplish cutaneous and mucosal lesions. He also reports cough and shortness of breath for 3 months and there are some chest findings on examination of his right lung. He has recently been found to be HIV-positive. 162 --- PAGE BREAK -- Answer to Question 1 What Are Your Most Important Differential Diagnoses? In a newly diagnosed HIV-infected patient with a chronic history of cough, the diagnosis of tuberculosis should always be considered and vigorous attempts made to exclude it. The skin lesions are typical for Kaposi’s sarcoma (KS). The presence of palatal lesions supports this possibility and increases your suspicion of pulmonary involvement. Answer to Question 2 How Would You Approach This Patient? The patient should be assessed for possible pulmonary tuberculosis, which should include a urine LAM, sputum microscopy for acid-fast bacilli (AFB), Xpert MTB/RIF and chest radiograph where necessary. Where available, bronchoscopy remains the gold standard investigation for endobronchial tration in the lower and mid lung zones. KS. Dual pathology of pulmonary KS and TB is not uncommon, and a high index of suspicion for TB should be maintained, particularly as TB remains responsible for many He was referred to start antiretroviral medication and HIV-related deaths. palliative chemotherapy. The main concern of the patient and primary caregiver should be recorded to assist with prioritizing interventions SUMMARY BOX that promote quality of life. These concerns may be physical, psychological, social or spiritual. General positive living Kaposi’s Sarcoma advice, including safe sexual practice, screening for STIs KS is an incurable HIV-associated malignancy. The incidence of and partner (s) and children testing for HIV, may also be KS is on the decline globally as a result of prevention of disease addressed. The diagnosis should be explained to the patient because of early initiation of ART. KS is caused by human herpesvirus-8 (HHV-8), also known as Kaposi’s sarcomain a style and language which is supportive and understandassociated herpes virus (KSHV). KS commonly affects the skin able. The practitioner should allow time for questions and but may also involve lymph nodes, lungs and the gastrointestinal exploration of relevant issues, which can assist with planning. tract. Diagnosis of cutaneous disease is often made by clinical Such communication can facilitate the development of real- appearance though biopsy is recommended. istic expectations from the start of the therapeutic process. Endemic KS does occur in HIV-uninfected individuals, typically with a more indolent course. All HIV infected patients with KS The patient should be started on antiretroviral therapy should be started on ART. For those with more extensive cuta (ART) as soon as possible both to control HIV and as part neous disease or visceral involvement, combining antiretroviral of the therapeutic response to KS. There is a small possibility medication with chemotherapeutic agents promotes optimal of KS immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome, tumour regression. Agents such as liposomal doxorubicin, recognizable as worsening disease some weeks after com- paclitaxel, bleomycin, vincristine, vinblastine and etoposide can be considered. Drug availability, access to safe chemotherapy mencement of ART. administration, contraindications and side effects of particular Adjuvant palliative chemotherapy is indicated for patients agents should be considered with reference to the patient and the with pulmonary KS. setting. Tumour response to immunomodulating agents has been demonstrated in a small study in the USA. Outcomes remain poor The Case Continued… for patients with extensive visceral disease (AIDS Clinical Trials Group stage T 1). In these situations, quality of life remains the goal of care, involving patient and supportive family members to His main concern was shortness of breath. His wife was also provide holistic palliative care, which should be initiated long HIV-positive but not on ART, and his two children 6 and before the end of life. 4 years old had not yet been tested. His CD 4 count was Pain and other symptoms should be assessed and managed. 134 cells/μL, HB 10.2 g/d L and MCV 88.4 f L. Other Low-dose liquid morphine has an established role for symptom relief of breathlessness once all other causes have been excluded parameters were normal. and/or treated optimally. Non-drug measures to improve His chest radiograph showed bilateral patchy opacificabreathlessness, such as positioning and companionship to tions in the lower and mid zones of the lungs ( Peribronchovascular changes are typically seen in patients with pulmonary KS. Further Reading Sputum and Gene Xpert tests were negative for the presence of tuberculosis. A bronchoscopy was attempted but 1. Wood R. Clinical features and management of HIV/AIDS. failed because of technical difficulties. The patient made In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. no improvement with a short course of oral antibiotics. London: Elsevier; 2013 [ --- PAGE BREAK -- 164 2. Malawi Guidelines for the Clinical Management of HIV in Chil- 4. Chin C, Booth S. Managing breathlessness: a palliative care dren and Adults 3 rd ed. Available from: https://aidsfree. usaid. approach. Postgrad Med J 2016;92:393–400. https://doi. org/ gov/sites/default/files/malawi_art_2016. pdf. 10.1136 /postgradmedj-2015-133578. 3. Gonc¸alves PH, Uldrick TS, Yarchoan R. HIV associated Kaposi’s 5. Caesarman E, Damania B, Known SE, et al. Kaposi Sarcoma. Nat Sarcoma and related diseases, AIDS 2017;31(14):1903–16. https:// Rev Dis Primers 2019;5:9. https://doi. org/10.1038 /s 41572-019 www. ncbi. nlm. nih. gov/pmc/articles/PMC 6310482 /. 0060-9.