60 A 6-Year-Old Boy from Malawi With Proptosis of the Left Eye ELIZABETH M. MOLYNEUX Clinical Presentation The second possibility is that it is another type of B cell lymphoma; and the third possibility is rhabdomyosarcoma. History It is not a retinoblastoma, which starts in the eye and usually, but not always, presents at an earlier age. The process is A 6-year-old Malawian boy from the lakeshore of Lake painless, which excludes infection, and it is non-pulsating Malawi presents with a painless, proptosed left eye that his which makes the diagnosis of an arteriovenous malformation family first noticed 3 weeks ago. It has worsened rapidly unlikely. Lachrymal gland tumours are more anteromedial though his vision is still normal. He denies any pain. than this mass. Clinical Findings Answer to Question 2 What Investigations Would You Do to Confirm the On examination he is afebrile, the right eye is normal, the left Diagnosis and Direct Your Treatment Plan? eye is proptosed but non-pulsating ( round and clear and responds well to light. When he is asked There are three questions to ask: what is it, where is it and is it to follow an object with his eyes the left eyeball hardly moves. safe to treat? He has no other swellings or abnormalities; and though he is What is it? A thorough history and physical examination thin, he is not malnourished. will narrow the field. Is this a multifocal or localized lesion? Knowing the age will rule in some more likely diagnoses and rule out others. Are there any systemic or neurological signs Questions and symptoms? A fine-needle aspirate (FNA) or biopsy will confirm the diagnosis. 1. What are the three most likely diagnoses? Where is it? Again, the examination will assist. An 2. What investigations would you do to confirm the diagnoabdominal ultrasound scan will demonstrate any intrasis and direct your treatment plan? abdominal masses and organ involvement. A cytospun sample of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) should be examined for Discussion malignant cells; a full blood count (FBC) should also be done and bone marrow aspirate (BMA) examined. A chest radio A young Malawian boy presents because of a progressive graph is useful if intrathoracic pathology is suspected. painless proptosis of his left eye for the past 3 weeks. His vision is not impaired. Apart from being proptosed, the eye on examination looks normal. The boy resides in an area endemic for malaria and schistosomiasis. Answer to Question 1 What Are the Three Most Likely Diagnoses? This is a rapidly developing proptosis in a boy who lives in a malaria-endemic area; the most likely diagnosis is Burkitt’s lymphoma. 165 --- PAGE BREAK -- 166 ment for presumed Burkitt’s lymphoma to start as soon as possible to prevent further proptosis and irreversible damage to the eye. Delay could mean the eye losing its blood supply and ‘melting’, leaving the boy sightless in that eye. When the LP was done, intrathecal methotrexate and hydrocortisone were given as prophylaxis against CNS involvement. Oral allopurinol and hyperhydration were commenced; chemotherapy was given the next day. The eye looked less proptosed within 48 hours and was back to normal within a week. He had four courses of chemotherapy in the next 30 days ( disease and pronounced cured. Is it safe to treat? Anaemia (<7 g/d L) and thrombocytopenia (<50 109 /L) should be corrected before giving che SUMMARY BOX motherapy. A blood film and stool and urine samples should be examined to exclude or treat malaria or any other invasive Burkitt’s Lymphoma parasitic infections such as schistosomiasis or strongyloidia Endemic Burkitt’s lymphoma is a highly aggressive B-cell nonsis. The abdominal ultrasound scan will demonstrate any Hodgkin’s lymphoma. It is the fastest-growing tumour known in renal involvement and forewarn of possible complications man and doubles its cells’ numbers every 24 to 48 hours when treatment is given. Baseline renal function and liver ( function tests are useful but not essential. HIV status will (EBV) and malaria, and has a chromosomal translocation that activates the c-myc oncogene. It is the most common childhood not affect the treatment; but if positive, infections and anaecancer (about 50 %) in areas where malaria is holoendemic. It is mia should be anticipated during chemotherapy. twice as common in boys as girls and the peak age of presentation is 6 to 7 years. Outcome with early diagnosis and intensive The Case Continued… chemotherapy in children is excellent. In resource-constrained settings, treatment intensity has to be balanced with good supportive care, the child’s nutritional status and stage of the disease. The boy was admitted and a full work-up was done as a mat This means that less aggressive treatment often has to be given ter of urgency (FNA, BMA, FBC, lumbar puncture (LP), with less successful outcomes. Nevertheless, with stage HIV antibody test, stool and urine microscopy) and an adjusted therapies, designed by oncologists of the Paediatric abdominal scan was carried out. This was to enable treat- Oncology in Developing Countries group (PODC), which is an arm of the International Society of Paediatric Oncology (SIOP), and by common consensus and studies done in low-income settings, 60 % cure at 1 year can be achieved at a very low cost and manageable toxicity. Further Reading 1. Newton R, Wakeham K, Bray F. Cancer in the tropics. In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 [ 2. Molyneux EM, Rochford R, Griffin B, et al. Burkitt’s lymphoma. Lancet 2012;379(9822):1234–44. 3. Hesseling P, Israels T, Harif M, et al. Practical recommendations for the management of children with endemic Burkitt’s lymphoma (BL) in a resource limited setting. Pediatr Blood Cancer 2013;60(3): 357–62. dren, adolescents and young adults in Sub-Saharan Africa. Blood morphic tumour cells of intermediate size, indistinct nuclei with coarse chromatin and vacuoles in the cytoplasm ( 100 high-power field). 2018;132(3):254–63.