61 A 48-Year-Old Woman from Thailand With Fever and Disseminated Cutaneous Abscesses SABINE JORDAN Clinical Presentation History A 46-year-old Thai woman is transferred to a German clinic for tropical diseases with a 2-month history of recurrent cutaneous and subcutaneous abscesses, progressive lymphadenopathy and weight loss. Despite various antibiotic therapies, clinical symptoms and inflammatory markers had deteriorated, resulting in hospital admission. Pus and blood cultures did not yield any growth, and histopathology of a lymph node biopsy showed non-specific lymphadenitis. The symptoms started 6 to 8 weeks after her return from a family visit to northern Thailand. During her stay the patient had suffered from high fever, dry cough and fatigue. Clinical Findings TABLE Laboratory Results on Admission 61.1 A 46-year-old woman, 158 cm, 65 kg (BMI 26 kg/m 2), afebrile, blood pressure 130 /80 mm Hg, pulse 80 bpm. Parameter Patient Reference Enlarged, tender cervical, nuchal, inguinal and axillary WCC ( 109 /L) 30.8 3.8–11 lymph nodes. Massive, tender swelling of the upper eyelids. Disseminated fluctuant cutaneous and subcutaneous Haemoglobin (g/d L) 8.2 12.3–15.3 abscesses with surrounding erythema ( of pus on slight pressure. Painful swelling of the left elbow. Platelets ( 109 /L) 592 150–400 Otherwise normal physical examination. CRP (mg/L) 267 <5 Laboratory Results and Imaging ESR (mm/h) >110 <20 Lab results on admission are shown in Table 61.1. A radiograph of the patient’s left elbow is shown in Figure 61.2. Discussion Questions A 46-year-old woman from Thailand presents with a 2-month history of recurrent and treatment-refractory cuta 1. What are your most important differential diagnoses? neous and subcutaneous abscesses, progressive lymphade 2. What investigations would you like to do? nopathy and weight loss. Her symptoms started 6 to 167 --- PAGE BREAK -- 168 methods – where available – can help accelerate the diagnosis, because isolation of the pathogen from culture might take several weeks. For histoplasmosis, serological antigen and antibody tests are available. These may also help speed up the diagnostic process, but negative results do not rule out infection; antibody testing lacks sensitivity in immunocompromised patients. Furthermore, the patient should be tested for HIV, and a fasting blood glucose level can help rule out diabetes mellitus. The Case Continued… Initially, the clinically suspected diagnosis was melioidosis, which is a common cause of disseminated abscesses in patients from north-eastern Thailand. The patient received imipenem, which led to a slight improvement of her skin manifestations but inflammation parameters remained grossly elevated. the radial epicondylus, osteomyelitis and articular effusion. remained sterile, a submandibular lymph node was extirpated. Histologically, this lymph node showed fungal cells 8 weeks after returning from a visit to northern Thailand. On that were identified as Histoplasma capsulatum by PCR. This examination, multiple cutaneous and subcutaneous abscesses was later confirmed by culture. Serology for histoplasmosis and a generalized lymphadenopathy are noted. Laboratory remained negative. findings show elevated systemic markers of inflammation. In retrospect, the febrile illness the patient had suffered A radiograph of the swollen elbow reveals osteomyelitis. whilst in Thailand may have been acute pulmonary histoplasmosis (see Summary Box). Answer to Question 1 While on antifungal treatment with liposomal amphoter What Are Your Most Important Differential icin B (3 mg/kg per day, total dose 3 g) the patient developed Diagnoses? a generalized seizure. CSF analysis revealed lymphocytic pleocytosis, which, despite the absence of direct pathogen The clinical picture and the laboratory and radiological finddetection, may have been a cerebral manifestation of ings are highly suspicious of a systemic infection. As previous histoplasmosis. antibiotic treatment courses were ineffective and microbio On treatment with liposomal amphotericin B the logical tests were negative, fungal infections, such as histopatient’s clinical state and the laboratory findings improved plasmosis, and mycobacterial infections should be dramatically. The patient was started on itraconazole mainconsidered. Furthermore, bacterial infections with special tenance therapy for an additional 6 months. requirements for cultivation and/or limited antibiotic sus No evidence of immunosuppression was found in the ceptibility such as Burkholderia pseudomallei, Brucella diagnostic work-up. species, Francisella tularensis or Actinomyces species could On follow-up the patient presented in a fair general have been misdiagnosed before. condition. Some of the former abscess sites showed post As a result of the extensive disease, underlying immunoinflammatory hyperpigmentation, enlarged lymph nodes deficiency, such as HIV infection, diabetes mellitus, antiwere no longer present and the osteolytic lesions were body deficiency or impaired granulocyte function, have to partly recalcified. Repeat histoplasma serology remained be ruled out. negative. If further microbiological investigations remain negative, rare autoimmune syndromes such as idiopathic nodular pan- SUMMARY BOX niculitis (Weber–Christian disease) or aseptic abscesses syndrome have to be taken into account. Histoplasmosis Answer to Question 2 Histoplasmosis is caused by H. capsulatum, a dimorphic fungus that remains in a mycelial form at ambient temperatures What Investigations Would You Like to Do? and grows as yeast at body temperature in mammals. The Additional microbiological and histopathological investiga- fungus can be found in temperate climates throughout the tions seem to be crucial in this case. Biopsies of skin, world, predominantly in river valleys in parts of the USA, the West Indies, Central and South America, Africa, India, abscesses and lymph nodes should be sent for culture and his South East Asia and Australia. The soil in areas endemic for topathological studies. Testing should focus on fungal and histoplasmosis provides an acidic damp environment with high mycobacterial infections. PCR (polymerase chain reaction) organic content that favours mycelial growth. Highly --- PAGE BREAK -- contaminated soil is found near areas inhabited by bats and from fungal cultures takes up to 3 weeks. Serology lacks birds. Birds cannot be infected by the fungus and do not sensitivity, especially in immunocompromised patients. In transmit the disease; however, bird excretions contaminate the these cases, blood and urine antigen testing should be soil, thereby enriching the growth medium for the mycelium. In performed. contrast, bats can become infected, and they transmit histo- In patients with disseminated infection, initial treatment with plasmosis through their droppings. Contaminated soil can be liposomal amphotericin B (3–5 mg/kg daily) is highly effective. potentially infectious for years. Outbreaks of histoplasmosis Itraconazole (400 mg daily) is favoured for maintenance therhave been associated with construction and renovation activ- apy. The duration of treatment depends on the severity of ities that disrupt soil contaminated with Histoplasma species. infection and the immune status of the patient. IDSA (Infectious Inhalation of fungal spores may lead to acute pulmonary Diseases Society of America) guidelines recommends 6 to histoplasmosis; however, approximately 90 % of individuals 18 months in total. with acute infection remain asymptomatic. In patients with underlying lung pathology, chronic pulmonary disease can occur. Patients develop cavities that may enlarge and result in Further Reading necrosis. Untreated histoplasmosis may lead to progressive pulmonary fibrosis that leads to recurrent infections and 1. Hay RJ. Fungal infections. In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical respiratory and cardiac failure. Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013. In children, older individuals and immunocompromised patients, dissemination of the infection may occur. The symp- 2. Kauffman CA. Histoplasmosis: a clinical and laboratory update. toms of disseminated histoplasmosis typically include fever, Clin Microbiol Rev 2007;20:115–32. malaise, anorexia and weight loss. Physical examination will 3. Wheat LJ, Freifeld AG, Kleiman MB, et al. Clinical practice guideoften show hepatosplenomegaly and lymphadenopathy, some lines for the management of patients with histoplasmosis: 2007 patients may present with mucous membrane ulcerations as update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect well as skin ulcers, nodules or molluscum-like papules. Rarely, Dis 2007;45:807–25. disseminated infection can also occur in immunocompetent 4. Wheat LJ, Azar MM, Bahr NC, Spec A, Relich RF, Hage C. Hispatients. toplasmosis. Infect Dis Clin North Am 2016;30(1):207–27. In disseminated disease, culture of tissue samples or 5. Azar MM, Hage CA. Laboratory diagnostics for histoplasmosis. body fluids and histopathology should be obtained. PCR J Clin Microbiol 2017;55(6):1612–20. can help speed up the diagnostic process because isolation