63 A 38-Year-Old European Expatriate Living in Malawi With Difficulty Passing Urine JOEP J. VAN OOSTERHOUT Clinical Presentation Questions History 1. Which important pieces of information are missing? 2. What are possible diagnoses and which investigations A 38-year-old European expatriate presents at the medical would you order? outpatient clinic in a tertiary hospital in Malawi with progressive constipation and difficulty passing urine for the past Discussion 3 weeks. He noticed that he had to use increasing abdominal pressure to pass urine and eventually became only able to A 38-year-old European expatriate living in Malawi presents pass small amounts at a time. This is associated with increaswith constipation, bladder retention, an episode of probable ing lower abdominal discomfort, abnormal sensations in the haematuria, erectile dysfunction, genital paraesthesia, signifgroins and around the genitals and some erectile dysfunction. icant weight loss and fatigue. There are no abnormal neuro He has no weakness and there is no dysaesthesia and no loss logical findings on examination, however most of the of sensation in his legs. However, he mentions that walking complaints are compatible with a conus syndrome because did not feel normal, although he cannot fully explain what of a lesion within the conus medullaris or because of comthe abnormality is. He has no backache. pression. The constitutional symptoms suggest an underly Over the past 2 months he has experienced unintentional ing chronic infection or malignancy. weight loss of 8 kg and fatigue without fever or night sweats. He blames this on stressful circumstances at work. He has Answer to Question 1 sexual contact with his wife only, to whom he has been married for several years. Which Important Pieces of Information Are One week prior to presentation he had noticed reddish Missing? discoloration of his urine. He had no painful micturition The important missing pieces of information are details of or fever at that time. He visited a local clinic and was pre- the recent visit to the local clinic and exposure to fresh water scribed four different types of medication, which he com- in Malawi. On physical examination, the anal reflex should pleted. There is no history of trauma and the rest of his have been tested. previous medical history is unremarkable. Answer to Question 2 Physical Examination What Are Possible Diagnoses and Which Investigations Would You Order? He looks healthy and has normal vital signs. There are no abnormalities on general examination, except for a palpable The most important differential diagnosis for a conus medulbladder. The rectal examination reveals a low anal sphincter laris syndrome in a young, otherwise healthy man living in tone and the genital examination is normal. He has lively, tropical Africa is spinal cord schistosomiasis. Other imporsymmetrical tendon reflexes in the legs without clonus or tant infections to consider are spinal tuberculosis, a spinal pathological plantar reflexes, and no abnormalities in the rest abscess and neurosyphilis. A tumour or metastases impinging of the neurological examination. on the conus medullaris should be ruled out. 173 --- PAGE BREAK -- 174 Urine and stool microscopy for ova of Schistosoma haema- thickening of the urine bladder wall at the base and the postobium and S. mansoni, respectively, should be ordered. A full terior aspect. blood count should be done, including a white cell differen- The diagnosis of an infection with Schistosoma haematotial count to look for eosinophilia. Creatinine and C-reactive bium was made as evidenced by the urine findings and supprotein should be tested. ported by the eosinophilia and the abnormalities seen in the Schistosomiasis serology would be useful in this bladder wall on MRI scanning. This was complicated by spiexpatriate. nal cord schistosomiasis (see Summary Box) with lesions in A VDRL and an HIV test should be done. An ultrasound the conus medullaris, causing a conus syndrome. A dual of the abdomen assessing bladder volume before and after infection with S. haematobium and S. mansoni is possible, micturition and imaging of the spinal cord should be because S. mansoni is the more common pathogen causing requested. spinal cord schistosomiasis, and both pathogens are endemic in Malawi. Theoretically, the spinal cord abnormalities could The Case Continued… have been caused by other conditions, such as tuberculosis and metastatic cancer, for instance from a bladder carcinoma. The patient was able to retrieve details of his urine micros- Although it has been argued that S. haematobium infection is copy from the local clinic. Schistosoma haematobium eggs a risk factor for bladder carcinoma, this is mainly observed had been identified in his urine and he had been treated with in long-term heavy infections, which are uncommon in expaa full dose of praziquantel, a course of ciprofloxacin, busco- triates. Further tests to rule out such distinct possibilities pan and bisacodyl. are not readily available in Malawi and were not deemed He had swum regularly in Lake Malawi. necessary. An abdominal ultrasound scan after attempted micturi- The patient required urinary catheterization for 2 weeks. tion showed a large bladder residue without further He made a full recovery after a second course of praziquantel abnormalities. and a course of high-dose prednisolone, tapered off over Full blood count showed a normal absolute WBC of 2 months. He was well after more than 2 years of follow-up. 9 109 /L with a relative eosinophilia of 21.8 % (reference range: 1–6 %) and an absolute eosinophil count of 1.15 109 /L (reference: <0.45 109 /L). ALT was slightly SUMMARY BOX elevated. Creatinine and CRP were normal. An HIV test and the VDRL were negative and micros Neuroschistosomiasis copy of a stool and urine sample were normal. Serological tests for schistosomiasis were not available. Neuroschistosomiasis can occur in the brain and more An MRI scan of the spinal cord was performed frequently in the spinal cord. Cerebral schistosomiasis can be asymptomatic or present with seizures, lateralizing signs ( and meningo-encephalitis. Spinal cord schistosomiasis the anterior aspect of the conus, with associated high T 2 sig- (SCS) is more frequent in S. mansoni than in S. haematonal representing oedema extending from the lower end of the bium infections and often causes severe disability because conus to the level of T 9. In addition, there was nodular of paraparesis and bladder dysfunction. It is also the most important severe complication of schistosomiasis in travellers. Our understanding of the pathophysiology of neuroschistosomiasis is limited. For unknown reasons, ectopic worms lodge in the venous plexus around the CNS instead of their normal habitat. Laminectomy with biopsy of the nervous tissue is the only method that gives a definite diagnosis of SCS. However, this procedure should be avoided because of its risks. Diagnosis is based upon spinal cord imaging and proof of exposure to the parasite. Urine should be examined for S. haematobium eggs; for S. mansoni, stool microscopy may be attempted but lacks sensitivity, which is much higher for rectal biopsies. The circulating cathodic antigen (CCA) test is a urine antigen test, which may prove S. mansoni infection. It detects an antigen regurgitated by adult worms of S. mansoni. It is less sensitive for S. haematobium and generally works better if the parasite burden is high. A novel test for the circulating anodic antigen (CAA) is under development and seems to be more promising for proof of both parasite species in urine and blood. Serological tests are useful in patients from non-endemic countries. They lack sensitivity and specificity in endemic populations. Detection of schistosomal antibodies in the CSF is specific but not widely validated. Eosinophils are present in the CSF in about --- PAGE BREAK -- Further Reading Other causes of myelitis should be ruled out, which is often impossible in low-resource settings where pragmatic treatment for suspected neuroschistosomiasis may be justified. 1. Bustinduy AL, King CH. Schistosomiasis. In: Farrar J, editor. Treatment of neuroschistosomiasis is with antischistosomal Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 drugs (praziquantel) plus corticosteroids and is based on case [ series and expert opinion. The pathology is caused by 2. Ferrari TC, Moreira PR. Neuroschistosomiasis: clinical symptoms inflammation around Schistosoma eggs. Praziquantel kills adult and pathogenesis. Lancet Neurol 2011;10(9):853–64. flukes only and thereby stops additional eggs being shed into 3. Colley DG, Bustinduy AL, Secor WE, King CH. Human schistothe spinal cord. Most early improvement of the neurological somiasis. Lancet 2014;383(9936):2253–64. presentation is thought to result from the antiinflammatory 4. Silva LC, Maciel PE, Ribas JG, et al. Treatment of schistosomal effects of corticosteroids. The optimal dose and duration are myeloradiculopathy with praziquantel and corticosteroids and evalnot well known. Up to 6 months of high-dose corticosteroids is recommended; however, data from randomized controlled uation by magnetic resonance imaging: a longitudinal study. Clin trials are lacking. Infect Dis 2004;39(11):1618–24. Laminectomy should be considered in patients with severe 5. Bonnefond S, Cnops L, Duvignaud A, et al. Early complicated spinal cord compression. schistosomiasis in a returning traveller: key contribution of new About 65 % of patients with spinal cord schistosomiasis molecular diagnostic methods. Int J Infect Dis 2019;79:72–4. who are treated early, recover completely or are left with negligible deficits that do not cause any functional limitations; the remaining patients are left with sequelae that vary from mild to severe.