65 A 4-Year-Old Girl from Bolivia With a Dark Nodule on Her Toe THOMAS WEITZEL Clinical Presentation Discussion History A 4-year-old girl who lives on a farm in Bolivia presents with a slowly growing nodular lesion on her toe. Her brother has A 4-year-old girl presents with a history of several days of a similar lesions on his feet. slowly growing nodule on the fifth toe of her right foot that is moderately painful when wearing shoes. The family moved from Chile to the Cochabamba region in Bolivia about Answer to Question 1 6 months ago, where they live on a farm. Her 9-year-old How Would You Diagnose This Disease? brother has similar lesions on two toes. The macroscopic presentation and localization of this lesion allows the clinical diagnosis of tungiasis. Physicians who are Clinical Findings not familiar with the disease might send a sample for microscopic confirmation. 4-year-old girl in good general health. Close to the root of the an egg in a tissue sample. The female flea is usually destroyed fifth toenail of the right foot there is a dark-brown small nodduring the process of removal, but parts of the body as well as ule with a tiny central ulceration, surrounded by minimal eggs can still be found. inflammatory reaction ( when they had tried to squeeze the lesion, they observed white oval granules emerging from the nodule. Answer to Question 2 How Would You Treat the Patient? Questions The parasite should be completely removed using a sterile 1. How would you diagnose this disease? needle and/or curette. The resulting round lesion must be 2. How would you treat the patient? disinfected and dressed. The patient’s tetanus vaccination overs of glitter nail polish.) of female flea (arrow) and typical eggs (size 600 280 μm). 179 --- PAGE BREAK -- 180 status should be checked and the wound should be observed; endemic countries, constant re-infection causes severe morand if necessary, treated for superinfection. bidity including deformation and permanent disability. Important zoonotic reservoirs for human infections include pigs, dogs The Case Continued… and rats. In travellers, tungiasis is found in about 1 % of those presenting with dermatological problems. The diagnosis is usually based on the clinical presentation. The skin lesion healed within a week without complications. In non-endemic regions, the parasite and its eggs may be demonstrated in tissue samples and histopathological sec SUMMARY BOX tions. Treatment consists of removing the flea with a sterile needle or curette with or without local anaesthesia, disinfec Tungiasis tion and prevention or treatment of concomitant bacterial infections. Tungiasis is caused by the female Tunga penetrans (syn. sand To prevent the disease, contact with contaminated sand or flea, jigger, bicho do pe ), which burrows into the epidermis of soil should be avoided, e. g. by using solid footwear. The effect humans and various animals before oviposition. There, the of commonly used repellents has not been studied. Another parasite engorges to a size of approximately 1 cm, causing a strategy is to daily inspect the feet and extract sand fleas at an slowly growing nodular skin lesion. The flea is completely early stage of penetration. embedded into the skin, except for the tip of the posterior end, through which the respiration, defecation and oviposition occurs. Typical localizations are the periungual regions of the feet, Further Reading interdigital spaces and soles. However, other parts of the body might be affected after contact with contaminated soil. 1. Vega-Lopez F, Ritchie S. Dermatological problems. In: Farrar J, Clinically, the flea together with the surrounding inflamma- editor. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; tory reaction initially presents as a pale nodule with a dark 2013 [ centre; later the lesion might turn brown with a dark scab. It 2. Mumcuoglu KY. Other ectoparasites: leeches, myiasis and sand often causes local itching or pain. Symptoms are usually mild in fleas. In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. patients visiting endemic areas and start after several days in London: Elsevier; 2013 [ cases of first infestation. Individuals living in endemic regions 3. Feldmeier H, Keysers A. Tungiasis - A Janus-faced parasitic skin may suffer massive and repeated infestations leading to superinfection with complications such as gangrene, bacter- disease. Travel Med Infect Dis 2013;11:357–65. aemia or tetanus. 4. Heukelbach J. Revision on tungiasis: treatment options and preven The parasite is endemic in Latin America from Mexico to tion. Expert Rev Anti Infect Ther 2006;4(1):151–7. northern Argentina and the Caribbean. From there it was 5. Walker SL, Lebas E, De Sario V, et al. The prevalence and associintroduced into sub-Saharan Africa, probably around 150 years ation with health-related quality of life of tungiasis and scabies in ago. Tungiasis belongs to the category of neglected and schoolchildren in southern Ethiopia. PLo S Negl Top Dis 2017; poverty-related infectious disease. In poor communities of 11(8):e 0005808.