67 A 24-Year-Old Woman from the Peruvian Andes With Fever and Abdominal Pain FÁTIMA CONCHA VELASCO AND EDUARDO H. GOTUZZO Imaging Clinical Presentation A contrast-enhanced CT scan of her abdomen shows History multiple hypodense, non-enhancing lesions in the liver A 24-year-old woman from the highlands of Peru is trans- ( ferred to a hospital in the capital, Lima, with a 2-month history of upper abdominal pain, weight loss (5 kg), nausea and Questions vomiting. She tried analgesics, which did not control the pain. She also reports intermittent fevers for the past 2 weeks. 1. What are your differential diagnoses? Three days previously, she was seen at the emergency 2. What would be the most useful investigation to establish room of the same hospital for the above-mentioned com- the diagnosis? plaints. Abdominal ultrasound revealed multiple hypoechoic lesions in her liver. She was treated with ceftriaxone and met- Discussion ronidazole for suspected pyogenic liver abscesses but did not show any clinical improvement. A young woman from the Peruvian Andes presents with a The patient reported that about 2 to 3 months ago she history of fever, weight loss and abdominal pain. The blood started taking over-the-counter medicines to lose weight count reveals pronounced eosinophilia. The abdominal CT and changed her diet to vegetarian food. She also reported scan shows hypodense non-enhancing hepatic lesions. the consumption of energetic hot drinks made from alfalfa and watercress. Prior to her current illness, she was healthy. TABLE Laboratory Results on Admission to She is single and has no children. 67.1 Emergency Room Parameter Patient Reference Range Clinical Findings WBC ( 109 /L) 13.94 4–10 The patient looks ill, with pale mucous membranes but no Eosinophils (%) 43 <5 jaundice. Her blood pressure is 95 /60 mm Hg, pulse 105 bpm and temperature 38.5°C (101.3°F). On palpation Total eosinophil count 5.97 <0.5 of the abdomen there is right upper quadrant tenderness, and Haemoglobin (g/d L) 12.3 12–16 the liver is slightly enlarged with a liver span of 15 cm. The AST (U/L) 34 10–40 rest of the physical examination is normal. ALT (U/L) 55 7–40 AP (U/L) 170 20–126 Laboratory Results Amylase (U/L) 75 3–100 the emergency room. 183 --- PAGE BREAK -- 184 median section of liver (A, axial cross-section; B, lateral view). Answer to Question 1 symptoms rapidly improved and her laboratory parameters What Are Your Differential Diagnoses? went back to normal. On control tomography her liver lesions were seen to be disappearing. The patient was first treated for suspected pyogenic liver abscesses based upon the presence of fever, right upper SUMMARY BOX abdominal pain and hypoechoic liver lesions on ultrasound. However, the lack of any improvement after 3 days of Fascioliasis appropriate treatment makes this diagnosis less likely. Fascioliasis is caused by the liver flukes Fasciola hepatica or In a patient from the Andes with high eosinophilia and a less frequently F. gigantica. Fascioliasis has the widest latituknown history of alfalfa and watercress consumption, fascidinal, longitudinal and altitudinal distribution of any known oliasis is the most important diagnosis to consider. Amoebic zoonotic diseases. It is a serious public health problem, with liver abscess is also part of the differential diagnosis, but between 2.4 and 17 million infected people worldwide and eosinophilia and the presence of multiple lesions are not typ- around 90 million at risk. In South America, the infection is encountered in the Andean countries, in particular in Bolivia and ical. Also, the infection is uncommon in young women and Peru. Egypt is another country with a very high prevalence of should respond to metronidazole treatment. fascioliasis. Other endemic infections in Peru that could present with Ova of Fasciola species are shed in the faeces of herbivores. similar symptoms are brucellosis, visceral toxocariasis or sec- Once they reach fresh water, miracidia hatch and infect a snail ondary infections in the context of other infections (i. e. ascari- which acts as an intermediate host. Additional development asis and hydatid disease). Opisthorchis, another liver fluke, could takes place inside the snail, then cercariae are released into the water. They develop into infective encysted metacercariae on be considered if the patient had a travel history to South-east freshwater plants. Humans acquire the disease by eating Asia, as the condition is not present in the Americas. watercress (salads) or drinking water contaminated with metacercariae. The illness includes four clinical phases: (1) incubation Answer to Question 2 phase, (2) invasive or acute phase, (3) latent phase and (4) What Would Be the Most Useful Investigation to obstructive or chronic phase. The incubation phase lasts from ingestion of metacercariae to first symptoms (6–12 weeks). The Establish the Diagnosis? invasive or acute phase begins with flukes migrating through Infection with the sheep liver fluke (Fasciola hepatica) is top of the small intestinal wall, the peritoneal cavity, the liver capsule the list of differential diagnoses in this patient with liver and the liver parenchyma. During the acute phase, lasting 3 to 5 months, the patients lesions, eosinophilia and a history of watercress consumption. typically present with intermittent fever, abdominal pain, mal Because ova appear in the stool only later in the course of aise, weight loss, urticaria and respiratory symptoms (e. g. the disease, serology is the diagnostic tool of choice. The Fas 2 cough, dyspnoea and chest pain). Less common findings ELISA is a serological method with good sensitivity and spec- include changes in bowel habits, nausea, anorexia, hepatoificity to diagnose the acute phase of F. hepatica infection. megaly, splenomegaly, ascites, anaemia and jaundice. Eosinophilia is almost always present during the acute phase. Liver biopsy is invasive and has little benefit in this con At the beginning of the subsequent latent phase the paratext; it could be considered if tests are negative and all sites have crossed the liver parenchyma to finally reach the treatments fail. common bile duct, where they mature and start depositing eggs. Ova appear in the stool 3 to 4 months after the ingestion of infective metacercariae. The latent phase is characterized by The Case Continued… the progressive resolution of gastrointestinal and respiratory symptoms. An unknown percentage of patients will progress to The Fas 2 ELISA titre was 0.56 (normal <0.2), supporting the fourth phase of the disease characterized by biliary the suspected diagnosis of fascioliasis. The patient received obstruction, cholelithiasis, ascending cholangitis, cholecystitis, or liver abscess. Haemorrhage (e. g. subcapsular one single dose of triclabendazole 10 mg/kg. Her clinical --- PAGE BREAK -- Further Reading haematomas), hepatic fibrosis or biliary cirrhosis might also be observed. During the acute phase, diagnosis of human fascioliasis is 1. Sithithaworn P, Sripa B, Kaewkes S, et al. Food-borne trematodes. based on clinical and radiological findings and immunodiag- In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: nostic assays such as the Fas 2-ELISA. Eosinophilia is usually Elsevier; 2013 [ present. 2. Marcos LA, Tagle M, Terashima A, et al. Natural history, clinicor During chronic infection, eosinophilia is rare but ova can be adiologic correlates, and response to triclabendazole in acute masdetected on stool microscopy. The yield can be improved using sive fascioliasis. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2008;78(2):222–7. rapid sedimentation techniques. Microscopic detection of eggs 3. Webb CM, Cabada MM. Recent developments in the epidemiolis considered definitive diagnosis of fascioliasis. Eggs may also ogy, diagnosis, and treatment of Fasciola infection. Curr Opin accidentally be discovered during surgery for biliary Infect Dis 2018;31(5):409–14. obstruction. Typical lesions seen on CT scan are contrast-enhancement 4. Carmona C, Tort JF. Fasciolosis in South America: epidemiology of the Glisson’s capsule, and multiple hypodense nodular and control challenges. J Helminthol 2017;91(2):99–109. lesions. 5. Kelley JM, Elliott TP, Beddoe T, et al. Current threat of triclaben Triclabendazole is the anthelmintic drug of choice. In acute dazole resistance in fasciola hepatica. Trends Parasitol 2016;32(6): cases a single dose of triclabendazole at 10 mg/kg is effective 458–69. in almost 90 % of cases and the same regimen is used in chronic disease. Triclabendazole should be taken with food to increase its bioavailability. Triclabendazole resistance seems to be an emerging problem.