68 A 31-Year-Old Woman from Malawi With a Generalized Mucocutaneous Rash CAMILLA ROTHE Clinical Presentation Questions History 1. What is the most likely diagnosis and what is it caused by? 2. How would you approach the patient? A 31-year-old woman presents to a hospital in Malawi with a generalized skin rash. The rash started 3 days before on the Discussion trunk, and then spread to the extremities and the mucosal membranes involving lips, oral mucosa, conjunctivae and A young Malawian woman presents with a generalized rash genital mucosa. involving her skin and mucous membranes. She also com There is also a productive cough with whitish sputum that plains of a productive cough of short duration, dysuria started 1 day before the rash appeared, and she also reports a and dysphagia. sore throat and dysuria for the past 2 days. The patient is HIV positive. Within the past month The patient had been found to be HIV positive she commenced treatment with co-trimoxazole and an 2 months earlier, when she was hospitalized with cryptococcal meningitis. She was treated with high-dose oral fluconazole, because amphotericin B and flucytosine were unavailable. She improved and was discharged home on a maintenance dose of fluconazole. Antiretroviral treatment with stavudine (d 4 T), lamivudine (3 TC) and nevirapine (NVP), as well as co-trimoxazole prophylaxis, were started 1 month previously. The rest of the medical history is unremarkable and there are no known allergies. Clinical Findings Her temperature is 37.7°C (99.9°F), blood pressure 120 /68 mm Hg, pulse 90 bpm and respiratory rate 24 breath cycles per minute. There is a generalized, non-itchy maculopapular rash involving the skin and mucous membranes but sparing the palms and soles. There is bilateral conjunctivitis. The eyelids and lips are covered with haemorrhagic crusts ( her mouth; talking and eating are difficult and painful. with conjunctivitis and swollen lips with haemorrhagic crusts. The macu The chest is clear. lopapular rash was non-itchy and spared the scalp. 186 --- PAGE BREAK -- antiretroviral triple therapy with d 4 T, 3 TC and NVP. She has a low-grade fever, but her chest is clear. Answer to Question 1 What is the Most Likely Diagnosis and What is It Caused By? The most important diagnosis to consider is Stevens–Johnson syndrome (SJS)/toxic epidermal necrolysis. This potentially life-threatening mucocutaneous hypersensitivity reaction is most commonly caused by drugs. Its incidence is much higher sive epidermal sloughing and large areas of denuded dermis. in HIV-positive than in HIV-negative patients. If SJS involves more than 30 % of the skin surface, it is called toxic epidermal patient and her family declined an NG tube, because they necrolysis (TEN). SJS/TEN may lead to widespread epihad observed that patients who had an NG tube or oxygen dermal detachment and erosions of the mucous membranes. probes were more likely to die than patients who did not have Non-specific prodromal symptoms such as cough, sore throat, such devices. fever, headache and myalgias usually precede the rash by sev The patient was given 0.9 % normal saline as mouthwash eral days and may be mistaken for a bacterial or viral infection, and dexamethasone eye ointment. Fever and cough settled or for malaria in a tropical setting. spontaneously. She was discharged after 10 days in hospital. Answer to Question 2 When all lesions had completely healed, she was started on a new antiretroviral combination therapy and nevirapine How Would You Approach the Patient? was replaced by efavirenz. Co-trimoxazole was not replaced SJS/TEN is a clinical diagnosis. Once suspected, all poten- because there were no alternative drugs available. The new tially causative drugs should be immediately withdrawn. If drug combination was tolerated well and no further rash in doubt, all drugs need to be stopped. In general, medica- occurred. tions initiated 2 to 4 weeks prior to the onset of symptoms are usually responsible. In this patient’s case, the major cul- SUMMARY BOX prit drugs were nevirapine and co-trimoxazole. The patient at this stage only had a maculopapular rash. Stevens–Johnson Syndrome and Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis However, patients with SJS/TEN often develop large bullous skin lesions. Once they break open, this leads to considerable SJS is a life-threatening mucocutaneous hypersensitivity reaction. It is most commonly caused by drugs. In SJS, less loss of serous fluid, similar to a burn. Therefore, patients with than 10 % of the total body surface is involved. If more than 30 % SJS/TEN ideally should be managed in a burns unit. Topical is affected, it is called toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN). antiseptics will reduce skin colonization; however, wound Between 10 % and 30 % it is classified as ‘SJS/TEN overlap’. debridement is not recommended. Steroid eye drops should The extent of skin involvement is a major determinant for be given in case of conjunctivitis, and early ophthalmological prognosis. In Western industrialized countries, SJS/TEN is considered review should be sought to prevent conjunctival scarring and rare, with an estimated incidence of 1 to 7 per million per year. blindness. Patients need careful management of fluids and However, it is about 1000 times more common in HIV-positive electrolytes and high caloric nutrition. A nasogastric (NG) individuals, and clinicians working in sub-Saharan Africa and tube is often helpful until the mucosal lesions have healed. other high-prevalence settings need to be aware of this Fever may be part of the clinical picture and there is no role condition. The drugs most commonly implicated in SJS/TEN are for prophylactic antibiotics unless there are signs of sepsis. antibiotics (in particular sulfonamides, but also other classes), Vital signs need to be checked regularly, and blood cultures the antiretroviral nevirapine, anticonvulsants and allopurinol. and full blood count taken repeatedly. Infectious agents (e. g. Mycoplasma pneumoniae and HSV) A urinary catheter should be inserted to prevent urethral may also be responsible. Host genetic factors also seem to play strictures. Skin and mucosal lesions in SJS/TEN are very a role. The pathophysiology is yet to be fully elucidated. Because of painful. Often, opioids are necessary to control the pain. an unknown mechanism there is widespread apoptosis of Upon discharge, patients should be urged to avoid the keratinocytes and subsequent epithelial necrosis. culprit drug and this should be clearly stated in the patient’s SJS/TEN often starts with non-specific, flu-like symptoms. documents. After several days a morbiliform rash sets in that becomes more and more confluent. The epidermis may slough, giving rise to flaccid bullae, leaving a characteristic denuded dermis The Case Continued… ( mon and may lead to scarring and blindness. Involvement of the Antiretroviral drugs and co-trimoxazole were stopped on oral mucosa and haemorrhagic crusting of the lips make it admission. Because the patient was febrile, blood cultures difficult for the patient to eat, drink and talk. Involvement of the and a rapid malaria test were taken and both came back neg- urogenital mucosa is very painful and may lead to urethral strictures. The oesophagus and trachea may also be affected. ative. She received IV fluids and a urinary catheter. The --- PAGE BREAK -- 188 Further Reading Diagnosis can often be made clinically. Skin biopsies may help rule out the major differential diagnoses such as staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome, toxic shock syndrome, 1. Gerull R, Nelle M, Schaible T. Toxic epidermal necrolysis and exfoliative dermatitis, autoimmune bullous diseases and acute Stevens–Johnson syndrome: a review. Crit Care Med 2011;39(6): paraneoplastic pemphigus. 1521–32. All potentially causative drugs need to be withdrawn 2. Duong TA, Valeyrie-Allanore L, Wolkenstein P, Chosidow O. immediately. Treatment is supportive and there is no clear Severe cutaneous adverse reactions to drugs. Lancet 2017;390: benefit of any other disease-modifying interventions. Systemic 1996–2011. corticosteroids do not seem helpful and the use of IV immu 3. Hoosen K, Mosam A, Dlova NC, Grayson W. An update on noglobulins is disputed. However, data from large controlled adverse cutaneous drug reactions in HIV/AIDS. Dermatopathology clinical trials are lacking. 2019;6:111–25. According to literature from the developed world, the case fatality rate of patients with SJS is up to 5 %; in TEN it is 30 % on 4. Hazin R, Ibrahimi OA, Hazin MI, et al. Stevens–Johnson synaverage. Primary causes of death are infection and multi-organ drome: pathogenesis, diagnosis, and management. Ann Med 2008; failure. 40(2):129–38. A severity-of-illness score (SCORTEN) has been published 5. Schulze Schwering M, Kayange P, Rothe C. Ocular manifestations to predict the lethality of patients with SJS/TEN. Its use in in patients with Stevens-Johnson syndrome in Malawi – a review of resource-constrained setting is limited, because it requires the literature illustrated by clinical cases. Graefes Arch Clin Exp laboratory results (urea, bicarbonate, glucose) that may be Ophthalmol 2019;257(11):2343–8. difficult to obtain.