71 A 71-Year-Old Man from Japan With Eosinophilia and a Nodular Lesion in the Lung YUKIFUMI NAWA, HARUHIKO MARUYAMA AND MASAKI TOMITA Clinical Presentation TABLE Full Blood Count Results at Presentation 71.1 History Parameter Patient Reference A 71-year-old Japanese man is referred to a local tertiary care WBC ( 109 /L) 6.5 4–10 hospital for further work-up of a nodular lesion in his right lung. He is clinically well and does not report any Haemoglobin (g/d L) 15.3 14–16 complaints. Platelets ( 109 /L) 190 150–300 The lesion was first detected 2 years earlier during a routine Neutrophils (%) 46.1 30–80 health check. Initially it was of linear shape. The patient has been regularly followed up since then. At his most recent follow-up Lymphocytes (%) 38.6 15–50 visit it was found by chest radiography ( ( Eosinophils (%) 8.3 0–6 nodular lesion of about 2 cm in diameter. The patient was born in Kyushu district, southern Japan, Total eosinophil count ( 109 /L) 0.54 <0.45 where he is still living. He has no history of travelling Basophils (%) 0.6 0–2 overseas. Ig E (U/m L) 185.7 <100 Clinical Findings The vital signs were normal. The chest was clear. The remainder of the physical examination was also normal. Imaging Investigations Fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (FDGPET-CT) shows increased FDG-uptake into the lesion in His full blood count and total Ig E are shown in Table 71.1. the right upper lobe ( Liver and renal function tests as well as electrolytes are normal. LDH and CRP are not raised. Questions Serologies 1. What kind of diseases should be considered in your dif Cryptococcus Ag negative, Aspergillus Ag negative, β-D-glucan ferential diagnosis? 6.0 pg/m L (<20 pg/m L), Quanti FERON test (QFT-2 G) 2. What further information should you obtain from the negative. patient? 195 --- PAGE BREAK -- 196 (D–F) Fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) with increased FDG uptake into the lesion in the right upper lobe. Answer to Question 1 Discussion What Kinds of Diseases Should be Considered in A 71-year-old Japanese man who is clinically well is worked Your Differential Diagnoses? up for a nodular lesion in his right lung. Blood tests reveal a The most important differential diagnosis for a nodular mild eosinophilia and a slightly raised Ig E. On PET scan the lesion with or without cavitation in the lung is either pulmopulmonary lesion shows an increased FDG uptake. nary tuberculosis or lung cancer. The PET-CT is unable to --- PAGE BREAK -- distinguish between a malignancy and an inflammatory TABLE Predominant Paragonimus Species by lesion of other aetiology, e. g. an infectious process. 71.2 Region Systemic endemic mycoses (e. g. histoplasmosis, blasto Predominant mycosis and paracoccidioidomycosis) may present with a Region Paragonimus spp. wide variety of pulmonary lesions in otherwise asymptomatic patients; however, they are not endemic in East Asia East Asia P. westermani and the patient does not have a history of travelling P. skrijabinia abroad. South and South-east Asia P. heterotremusb In addition to abnormal findings on the chest radiograph, Africa P. africanus this patient shows eosinophilia and elevated total Ig E levels. P. uterobilateralis One therefore needs to consider the possibility of pulmonary helminth infections, especially of lung fluke infection North America P. kelicottii (paragonimiasis). Central and South America P. mexicanus asyn. P. myazakii. b Exception: Philippines – P. westermani. Answer to Question 2 What Kind of Information Should You Obtain from the Patient? When suspecting lung fluke infection, it is important to find out if the patient may at any time have been exposed to this parasite. Paragonimus species are endemic all over Asia, in West and Central Africa and parts of Latin America. If the patient lives in an endemic area, or has a positive travel history, one should find out if he or she has ever eaten raw or undercooked freshwater crabs, which may harbour the infective stage (metacercariae) of Paragonimus species. Also, consumption of raw wild boar meat is a risk, because wild boar act as paratenic hosts, harbouring juvenile worms. Traditional medicine used in some East Asian countries may contain raw crab meat and juice and potentially act as a source of infection. However, some patients have a negative exposure history, and it has been suggested that even contaminated fingers and cooking utensils may act as a source of infection. right-sided pleural effusion. The Case Continued… Bronchoscopy did not reveal any signs of malignancy. Cytology of the bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid was negative for malignant cells and acid-fast bacilli. The Quanti FERON test and a wide range of tumour markers were negative. In view of the elevated Ig E levels, the patient’s eosinophilia and the fact that the patient originated from Southern Japan, paragonimiasis was strongly suspected and the patient’s serum was submitted for immunodiagnosis of parasitic diseases. Multiple-dot ELISA was strongly positive for P. westermani. The patient was treated with oral praziquantel 25 mg/kg tds for 3 consecutive days. The lung lesion gradually faded and eventually disappeared. His serum antibody titre also declined. --- PAGE BREAK -- 198 Paragonimiasis is a sub-acute to chronic lung disease caused by infection with lung flukes of the genus Paragonimus. Paragonimus westermani is the most widely distributed species in Asia, but several additional species also cause disease (Table 71.2). Apart from Asia, paragonimiasis occurs in the Americas and in sub Saharan Africa. Adult flukes live in the lungs of a mammalian host (felines, canines, humans). Ova are coughed up and either expectorated or swallowed and passed in the faeces. When eggs reach fresh water, miracidia hatch and infect a snail (first intermediate host). After asexual multiplication, cercariae are released and infect a crab or crayfish (second intermediate host). Human infection occurs mainly via consumption of raw or undercooked freshwater crabs or crayfish contaminated with Paragonimus metacercariae. In addition, eating raw meat of wild boar, which is a paratenic host, is an important route of infection, especially in Japan. Venison (deer meet) has also been proven as the potential source of P. westermani infection in humans. Because the range of paratenic hosts may even be wider, eating wild animal meat in general may be a risk factor for this disease. Metacercariae excyst in the small intestine and penetrate the reaction against P. westermani antigen. NHS: normal human serum the pleural space and finally enter the lung parenchyma where for positive control; Pw: P. westermani; Pm: P. miyazakii; Fh: Fasciola they mature into adults and produce eggs. Juvenile worms hepatica; Cs: Clonorchis sinensis; Se: Spirometra erinacei europaei; sometimes migrate into subcutaneous soft tissue or the central Cc: Cysticercus cellulosae; Di: Dirofilaria immitis; Tc: Toxocara canis; nervous system to cause unexpected, potentially deleterious As: Ascaris sum; Asx: Anisakis simplex; Gd: Gnathostoma doloresi; lesions. Sr: Strongyloides stercoralis. Clinical features of the disease are similar to those of pulmonary TB or lung cancer. Patients may have chronic cough, haemoptysis, chest pain, fever, night sweats and abnormal findings on chest imaging. Pleural effusion ( eosinophilia in the exudate and pneumothorax without apparent nodular lesion/cavitation may occur in the early stages and/or in light infections. Extrapulmonary paragonimiasis may present as painless, mobile subcutaneous swellings. Migration into the CNS may lead to acute eosinophilic meningoencephalitis and epilepsy. However, about 20 % of patients are asymptomatic and the disease is accidentally found on routine chest radiography, when nodules, ring shadows or cavities are typically seen. Eosinophilia is prominent during acute and sub-acute infection but may be only mild or absent in chronic disease. The definitive diagnosis is made by detection of ova in sputum, BAL fluid or faeces ( in light infections. Instead, an immunodiagnostic screening test such as multiple-dot ELISA ( bination with the patient’s history and additional laboratory results. Serological tests (e. g. ELISA) may detect early as well as chronic infections, and titres decline rapidly after cure. Praziquantel is the drug of choice. A course of 25 mg/kg tds for 3 consecutive days is usually effective against all Paragonimus species. Even in paragonimiasis-endemic areas, physicians often do not pay much attention to this disease and misdiagnose it as pulmo resected after diagnosis of lung cancer based on FDG-PET imaging. enormous socioeconomic loss, and create a mental and physical Note the chronic granulomatous lesion containing numerous Paragoni- burden for the patient because of unnecessary hospitalization and mus eggs (black arrows). Foreign body giant cells (white arrows) are also laboratory investigations, surgical interventions and/or long-term seen in the tissue. medication. Figure 71.5 shows a typical example of such a case, in which postoperative histopathology revealed the presence of Paragonimus eggs in the resected nodular lesion, which had been diagnosed as a lung cancer by FDG-PET imaging. SUMMARY BOX Paragonimiasis --- PAGE BREAK -- Further Reading 4. Nakamura-Uchiyama F, Mukae H, Nawa Y. Paragonimiasis: a Japanese perspective. Clin Chest Med 2002;23(2):409–20. 1. Sithithaworn P, Sripa B, Kaewkes S, et al. Food-borne trematodes. 5. Yoshida A, Matsuo K, Moribe J, et al. Venison, another source In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: of Paragonimus westermani infection. Parasitol Int 2016;65: Elsevier; 2013 [ 607–12. 2. Kong Y, Doanh PN, Nawa Y. Paragonimus. In: Xiao L, Ryan U, Yaoyu Feng Y, editors. Biology of foodborne parasites. Boca Raton: CRC Press; 2015. p. 445–62. 3. Nawa Y, Thaenkham U, Doanh PN, Blair D. Paragonimus westermani and Paragonimus species. In: Motarjemi Y, Moy G, Todd E, editors. Encyclopedia of food safety: hazards and diseases. San Diego, CA, USA: Elsevier; 2014. p. 179–88.