72 A 4-Year-Old Boy from Mozambique With Severe Oedema and Skin Lesions CHARLOTTE ADAMCZICK Clinical Presentation History An oedematous, HIV-negative 4-year-old boy from rural Mozambique is seen at the paediatric department of a central hospital in Malawi. He was admitted 5 days earlier with the suspected diagnosis of nephrotic syndrome and was started on furosemide and prednisolone; however, his oedema did not subside. Three weeks earlier he had been treated for pneumonia at a health centre. Clinical Findings The little boy is miserable, refusing to eat and apathetic with a puffy face and pitting oedema on the lower legs. His hair is brittle, sparse and fair in colour. The skin is dry and hyper pigmented; it is peeling off like ‘flaky paint’ ( pigmented and dry. It is peeling off like ‘flaky paint’. Underneath, the skin there are ulcerative skin lesions, most prominently in the is hypopigmented. groins ( Laboratory Results Albumin 2.2 g/d L (reference range 3.0–5.2 g/d L), haemoglobin 7 g/d L (12–14 g/d L). Questions 1. What is the likely diagnosis and how can it be distinguished from nephrotic syndrome? 2. How should the child be treated and what is the prognosis? Discussion Three weeks after a severe bacterial infection, a 4-year old boy from rural Mozambique develops oedema. The skin is hyperpigmented and dry, peeling off and there is discolor- ation of his hair. Treatment with furosemide has no influ- (where zinc ointment and Gentian violet solution (“GV paint”) has been ence on the extent of the oedema. Clinically, the little boy applied). 200 --- PAGE BREAK -- is sick and refusing to eat or drink. He is anaemic and his protein-to-energy ratio (e. g. maize, cassava or bananas). It is serum albumin is low. uncommon in communities where diet is supplemented by animal protein. Incidence peaks during the rainy season when Answer to Question 1 staple food items and vegetables are in short supply. However, kwashiorkor is not (just) a consequence of a diet What is the Likely Diagnosis and How Can It be low in protein and micronutrients. Infections often precede the Distinguished from Nephrotic Syndrome? onset of the disease. They lead to low albumin levels in the context of acute phase reactions. Diarrhoeal diseases and Generalized oedema in a child can have various causes. In capillary leakage result in further loss of protein, nutrients and nephrotic syndrome, serum albumin is low and there is heavy fluids. An imbalance between free radicals and insufficient levels proteinuria. Low serum albumin is however influenced by many of antioxidants leads to oxidative stress and damage of cell factors such as nutrition, liver function and intestinal resorption. membranes. Hypoimmunoglobulinaemia leads to severe infections, contributing to the high fatality rates associated with This child is displaying additional clinical features such as kwashiorkor. skin and hair changes as well as apathy. These are typical fea The typical age at presentation is 1 to 3 years; boys and girls tures of kwashiorkor, a form of severe acute malnutrition (see are equally affected. Summary Box). Hepatomegaly is a common finding. The hair becomes A urine dipstick test should be done to check for protein. depigmented, fair or reddish in colour and is easy to pluck. Hyperpigmented, dry, damaged and infected skin may show In nephrotic syndrome, proteinuria exceeds 3.5 g per day (4+ pale patches (‘flaky paint’ dermatosis) and ulcerations. Children on a urine dipstick) and the urine is often macroscopically with kwashiorkor are miserable, apathetic and often refuse frothy. In kwashiorkor, some proteinuria may be found to eat. but rarely exceeds 1+ on a dipstick test. Management is challenging and involves careful feeding with slowly increasing amounts of feeds with meticulous monitoring of glucose levels, weight gain and fluid status. Answer to Question 2 Prophylactic broad-spectrum antibiotics should be given to all How Should the Child be Treated and What is the patients, because signs of infection including fever may be Prognosis? absent. Diuretics are contraindicated because they further deplete the intravascular volume, causing hypotension. The The child needs to be admitted to the high dependency area oedema will settle once therapeutic feeding has been of the nutrition ward and treated according to WHO guide- established. lines for severe acute malnutrition with meticulously calcu- Patients should also receive folic acid, anthelmintics and, once stable, measles vaccination if unvaccinated. Relapses are lated amounts of feeds and close monitoring. The risks of common and renal and liver function, as well as glucose levels, infection, diarrhoea, anaemia, cardiac and liver failure are may be deranged well beyond the time of clinical recovery. high. Prophylactic antibiotics, monitoring of temperature Case fatality rates from kwashiorkor are high, with a median and haemoglobin as well as careful fluid replacement, are part of 20–30 %. Additional infection with HIV further worsens the of the treatment scheme. prognosis. The Case Continued… The skin in the groin and armpits continued to peel off and Further Reading became superinfected. The lesions could successfully be treated with Gentian violet solution. 1. Abrams S, Brabin BJ, Coulter JBS. Nutrition-associated disease. Initially the child did not tolerate 3-hourly feeds and In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. required feeding through a nasogastric tube. On day 5 in London: Elsevier; 2013 [ the nutrition rehabilitation unit he could eat by himself 2. Bwakura-Dangarembizi M, Amadi B, Bourke CD, et al. Health and the oedema started to settle. The transition to higher Outcomes, Pathogenesis and Epidemiology of Severe Acute Malnucaloric feeds was tolerated well and he could be discharged trition (HOPE-SAM): rationale and methods of a longitudinal into the community feeding program at day 15. observational study. BMJ Open 2019;9:e 023077. 3. Coulthard MG. Oedema in kwashiorkor is caused by hypoalbuminaemia. Paediatr Int Child Health 2015;35:83–9. SUMMARY BOX 4. WHO. Guideline: Updates on the management of severe acute malnutrition in infants and children. Geneva: World Health Orga Kwashiorkor nisation 2013. Available from: https://apps. who. int/iris/bitstream/ Kwashiorkor is a form of severe, acute malnutrition character- handle/10665 /95584 /9789241506328_eng. pdf?ua=1 ized by hypoalbuminaemia and oedema. 5. Heikens GT, Bunn J, Amadi B, et al. Case management of Kwashiorkor mainly occurs in areas where people live HIV-infected severely malnourished children: challenges in the on a monotonous diet and the staple food has a low area of highest prevalence. Lancet 2008;371(9620):1305–7.