73 A 21-Year-Old Male Migrant from Rural Mali With Massive Splenomegaly CAMILLA ROTHE Clinical Presentation TABLE Laboratory Results at First Presentation History 73.1 Reference A 21-year-old male migrant from rural Mali is referred to the Parameter Patient Range tropical medicine department of a university hospital in Germany. He has just been worked-up for splenomegaly and WBC ( 109 /L) 3.3 4–10 bicytopenia at the haematology department. However, the Neutrophils ( 109 /L) 2.29 1.8–7.2 underlying condition could not be established. Lymphocytes ( 109 /L) 1.4 1.5–4 Clinically, the patient is quite well, he only reports intermittent fever, and some “heaviness” on the left side of his Monocytes ( 109 /L) 0.28 0.2–0.5 abdomen for some time (the duration is difficult to specify). Eosinophils ( 109 /L) 0.12 <0.5 There are no night sweats and his weight appears to be stable. Haemoglobin (g/d L) 13.8 13–15 The patient migrated from rural Mali to Germany and arrived 1 year prior. During his journey he crossed Niger Platelets ( 109 /L) 124 150–350 and spent a few weeks at a detention centre in Libya until LDH (U/L) 185 <220 he made his way across the Mediterranean and through Italy Total bilirubin (mg/d L) 0.5 0.2–1.2 to Germany. He comes from a poor family and is unable to read and write. Ig M (g/l) 8.59 0.4–2.3 CRP 0.5 <0.5 Clinical Findings ESR mm/h 9 /21 <15 /30 Plasmodium spp. (thick and negative negative 21-year-old young man, who appears clinically well. Temthin film) perature 36.1°C (96.98°F), BP 120 /80 mm Hg, pulse P. falciparum IFAT 1:256 <1:32 64 bpm. The spleen is massively enlarged (around 15 cm below the left costal margin), but there is no clinical anaemia and no lymphadenopathy. Heart sounds are clear and there are no murmurs. The rest of the examination is normal. Questions Abdominal Ultrasound 1. What are the most important differential diagnoses in this patient? Spleen 21.8 cm in longitudinal diameter, the parenchyma 2. How would you manage him? appears homogenous. The liver is normal in size and the parenchyma looks normal. The flow of the portal and splenic veins is normal. There is no lymphadenopathy and no Discussion free fluid. A 21-year old migrant from rural Mali presents with massive splenomegaly, causing a feeling of heaviness in his abdomen Laboratory Results and reports intermittent fever. The symptoms have been pre The laboratory results are shown in Table 73.1. sent for some time. 202 --- PAGE BREAK -- At presentation he appears well and is afebrile. Gross unexplained, a bone marrow aspirate should be done to rule splenomegaly is the only abnormal finding confirmed by ultra- out a haematological disorder and look for intracellular Leishsound, which otherwise yields no pathological results. Labora- mania promastigotes. tory results show mild bicytopenia, normal LDH and almost 4-fold increased immunoglobulin M (Ig M). The systemic The Case Continued… inflammatory markers are not elevated. Blood films for malaria parasites are negative, but malaria serology is positive. HIV serology was negative; EBV and CMV serologies indicated previous infection. Serologies for schistosomiasis and leishmaniasis were also negative, and the blood culture did Answer to Question 1 not yield any pathogens. There were no ova of S. mansoni What Are the Most Important Differential found in the stool. Diagnoses in This Patient? Despite the negative blood film, PCR for P. falciparum Lymphoma or leukaemia is an important differential diagno- came back positive, making a diagnosis of hyperreactive sis to have in a patient with splenomegaly and fever anywhere splenomegaly very likely. in the world. However, in our patient it seems unlikely, The patient received one single course of dihydroartemibecause the differential count is normal, LDH, CRP and sinin/piperaquine and the reported episodes of fever sub ESR are not elevated and the specialist work-up elsewhere sided. Malaria PCR was still positive at follow-up 2 weeks did not yield a cause for his complaints. later, but has remained negative since then. Visceral leishmaniasis (VL) can present with massive Shortly after treatment, authorities threatened to deport hepatosplenomegaly, generalized lymphadenopathy and the patient back to Mali. A medical letter indicating that pancytopenia. Patients usually have a history of fever and he was at high risk for splenic rupture, which at his home weight loss and appear severely ill, which our patient did not. in rural Mali would mean certain death, was recognized Schistosomiasis is common in many parts of sub-Saharan and he was permitted to stay. Africa. Chronic S. mansoni infection causes liver fibrosis and The patient has been monitored for a total of 2.5 years at secondary portal hypertension with splenomegaly and the time of writing. Ig M levels took 2 years to get back to hypersplenism. normal. The size of the spleen slowly decreased; but at his Liver fibrosis in schistosomiasis (so called “pipestem fibro- last visit, remained slightly enlarged (14 cm in diameter). sis”) is usually easy to detect on ultrasound. In our patient, At his last visit, the young man was well and spoke fluent the liver appeared normal, and the flow of portal and splenic German. He went to school in Germany and has learned to veins was normal as well, making portal hypertension of any read and write. He planned to start vocational training to cause unlikely. become a house painter. Bacterial endocarditis and brucellosis may cause fever and SUMMARY BOX splenomegaly; however, the spleen tends to be only moderately increased in size and there were no murmurs on ardiac Hyperreactive Malarial Splenomegaly (HMS) examination. EBV and CMV infections may cause ongoing fever and HMS, formerly known as tropical splenomegaly syndrome (TSS), is one of the most common causes of massive splenosplenomegaly. Typical laboratory features include relative megaly in tropical regions with stable malaria transmission. and absolute lymphocytosis, elevated LDH and liver trans Other important causes include lymphomas, chronic myeloid aminases, which our patient does not have. In Africa, most leukaemia, myelofibrosis, haemoglobinopathies, schistosomipeople will be exposed to both viruses already in childhood. asis and visceral leishmaniasis. Our patient shows remarkably high Ig M titres, positive HMS is caused by an abnormal immune response to repeated infections with Plasmodium falciparum, P. malariae or malaria serology and a negative blood film. The most likely P. vivax that results in an overproduction of polyclonal Ig M. Ig M differential diagnosis for this patient therefore is hyperreacforms aggregates and immune complexes, which are phagotive malarial splenomegaly (HMS). HMS is the most com- cytosed by the reticuloendothelial system, leading to massive mon cause of massive splenomegaly in tropical areas with splenomegaly and hypersplenism. stable malaria transmission. HMS is more common in women than in men and mainly affects the age group between 20 and 40 years. There seems to be a genetic background, with ethnic and familial clustering. Answer to Question 2 HMS has also been described in expatriates residing in malariaendemic regions, and more and more cases are being How Would You Manage the Patient? described in refugees and migrants from malaria-endemic An HIV test should be ordered in any patient from Africa areas. with a history of fever and/or thrombocytopenia. Serologies Diagnostic criteria were proposed by Fakunle in 1982 and include splenomegaly extending >10 cm below the left costal for schistosomiasis and visceral leishmaniasis should be done margin without any other cause, elevated Ig M, elevated antiand blood cultures taken for Brucella species and bacterial malarial antibodies and favourable response to antimalarial endocarditis. prophylaxis. For HMS, malaria PCR should be ordered and anti- Even though commonly quoted in the literature, Fakunle’s malarial treatment attempted. If splenomegaly remains criteria are of limited practical use for clinicians practicing in --- PAGE BREAK -- 204 Further Reading resource-constrained settings, where HMS is naturally most common because malaria serology and Ig M levels are usually unavailable. Under those circumstances, clinicians are often 1. White NJ. Malaria. In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical Dislimited to presumptive treatment with antimalarials of a patient eases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 [ with massive splenomegaly, and HMS may be difficult to dif- 2. Fakunle YM. Tropical splenomegaly. Part 1: Tropical Africa. Clin ferentiate from lymphoma. Haematol 1981;10:963–75. Patients most commonly present with symptoms of anae 3. Bedu-Addo G, Bates I. Causes of massive tropical splenomegaly in mia and abdominal heaviness or discomfort, some report Ghana. Lancet 2002;360(9331):449–54. episodes of low-grade fever. Full blood count usually shows 4. Leoni S, Buonfrate D, Angheben A, et al. The hyper-reactive malaranaemia, bi- or pancytopenia reflecting hypersplenism. Malaria microscopy is usually negative, because parasitaemia is kept at ial splenomegaly: a systematic review of the literature. Malar J bay and therefore very low. However, molecular methods such 2015;14:185. as PCR may be able to detect low-level parasitaemia, as 5. Bisoffi Z, Leoni S, Angheben A, et al. Chronic malaria and hyperhighlighted in this case. reactive malarial splenomegaly: a retrospective study on the largest Treatment of HMS is effective with antimalarials for the series observed in a non-endemic country. Malar J 2016;15:320. duration of exposure, i. e. in endemic settings, lifelong. In migrants living in malaria non-endemic countries, one treatment course of antimalarials is enough to eliminate parasites as shown in this case, and repeated courses are not required. However, even after clearanc of infection splenic size and increased Ig M may still take a long time to get back to normal ranges.