75 A 25-Year-Old Woman from Zambia With a New-Onset Seizure OMAR SIDDIQI Clinical Presentation TABLE Blood Results on Admission History 75.1 A 23-year-old HIV-positive Zambian woman is referred Parameter Patient Reference Range from a health centre to a local teaching hospital in Lusaka WBC ( 109 /L) 5.8 4–10 after suffering her first ever seizure. The seizure occurred Haemoglobin (g/d L) 11.0 12–14 out of sleep. Her son walked into her bedroom after hearing a noise and found his mother on the floor unresponsive and Platelets ( 109 /L) 215 150–350 shaking all four limbs. This continued for 5 to 10 minutes. CD 4 count (cells/μL) 153 500–1200 The patient had been diagnosed with HIV infection Serum sodium (mmol/L) 135 130–145 1 month earlier. She is not yet on antiretroviral therapy (ART) but has been taking co-trimoxazole prophylaxis for Serum glucose (mmol/L) 4.5 3.9–5.5 7 days. She was successfully treated for pulmonary tuberculosis 4 years ago. The patient is unmarried with three children. She works in the hospital cafeteria. She does not drink alcohol or use TABLE any recreational drugs. CSF Results on Admission 75.2 Clinical Findings Reference Parameter Patient Range On examination she looks well, her GCS score is 15 /15, her Leukocytes (cells/μL) 5 0–5 vital signs are normal and she is afebrile. There is no meningism. The chest is clear. The neurological examination is CSF protein (g/L) 0.78 0.25–0.55 unremarkable. CSF glucose (mmol/L) 2.9 2.25–2.97∗ Cryptococcal antigen (Cr AG) Negative Negative Laboratory Results India Ink stain Negative Negative The malaria rapid diagnostic test is negative. Additional Gram stain Negative Negative blood results are shown in Table 75.1. Ziehl–Neelsen stain Negative Negative A lumbar puncture is done. The opening pressure is normal. The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is clear. CSF results are ∗½ to ⅔ of paired serum glucose sample. shown in Table 75.2. Imaging and EEG Results Electroencephalography (EEG) demonstrates focal slowing Questions in the right hemisphere ( shows frontal and parietal hypodense lesions in the white 1. How would you manage this patient? matter of the right hemisphere ( enhancement is present. with new-onset seizures in sub-Saharan Africa? 208 --- PAGE BREAK -- hemisphere. Answer to Question 1 How Would You Manage This Patient? The patient presents with a symptomatic seizure; there are obvious lesions in her brain and she is HIV-positive with advanced immunosuppression. Treatment should aim at both preventing further seizures (antiepileptic treatment) and managing the underlying condition (causative treatment). The patient and her guardians should be counselled about the nature of her epileptic disorder, respecting their beliefs and attitudes. The choice for an antiepileptic drug should take into account the local availability and costs for the patient. Phenobarbitone is the most widely available and most affordable drug in sub Saharan Africa, followed by carbamazepine. Newer drugs with fewer interactions and a better side effect profile, such as levetiracetam, are not yet routinely available. Phenytoin and valproic acid are also used but their delivery might be unreliable. Reliability of supply is an important factor the subcortical white matter. medication might put the patient at risk of withdrawal seizures. When starting a patient on phenobarbitone or carba Discussion mazepine, the effects of hepatic enzyme induction on antiretroviral therapy and hormonal contraception must A young Zambian woman presents with a new-onset seizure. be considered. There are no focal neurological deficits on examination. Syndromically, focal brain lesion is the underlying pathol The CSF examination is normal, apart from a slightly raised ogy in our patient. Differential diagnosis for focal brain protein level. Neuroimaging reveals hypodense lesions with- lesions in an HIV patient with a new-onset seizure includes out contrast enhancement restricted to the subcortical tuberculoma, progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy white matter. Electroencephalography demonstrates focal (PML), cerebral toxoplasmosis, cryptococcoma, brain slowing in the right hemisphere. The patient is HIV-positive, abscess and primary CNS lymphoma. Neurocysticercosis, and her CD 4 count is low. She is not yet on antiretroviral which can occur unrelated to HIV infection, also needs to treatment. be considered. --- PAGE BREAK -- 210 Lesions that selectively affect the white matter without Treatment of women of child-bearing age might pose contrast enhancement and without perifocal oedema are some additional challenges. In all women of child-bearing strongly suggestive of PML. There is no causative treatment age, folic acid (5 mg/day) should be added to the regimen. available for PML. Commencing antiretrovirals is currently AEDs recommended for women of child-bearing age in the only therapeutic option. resource-rich settings with low HIV prevalence, such as lamotrigine, are not available in sub-Saharan Africa and might have adverse interactions with ARVs, especially prote Answer to Question 2 ase inhibitors. In those cases where several AEDs are avail What is Your General Approach to a Patient able, the specific drug chosen for epilepsy treatment of a Presenting With New-Onset Seizures in woman of child-bearing age will be a trade-off between the Sub-Saharan Africa? health of the fetus and that of the mother. Here, one should The approach is influenced by (1) the high prevalence of consider that leaving out a drug because of its possible fetal HIV and subsequent immunosuppression; (2) the high bur- toxicity, such as valproic acid, and using an enzyme-inducing den of infection, including tuberculosis, bacterial meningitis drug with a better record regarding foetal malformations and tropical diseases, e. g. cerebral malaria; and (3) the lack of instead, might lead to a virological failure that would jeoparresources, in particular, low availability of imaging studies dize both the mother and the child. and antiepileptic drugs (AEDs). Counselling the patients and their guardians is of para CNS infections are a prominent cause of epileptic seizures mount importance. An epileptic seizure is a dramatic event. in sub-Saharan Africa. They can cause seizures during the In some African communities, epileptic disorder is still acute illness (acute symptomatic seizures), as well as weeks attributed to supernatural causes. Patients who have experior months after the acute episode, if the infection leaves enced epileptic seizures might become socially stigmatized. an epileptogenic ‘scar’ in the brain (remote symptomatic Patient-tailored, non-judgemental counselling, taking into seizures). account the patient’s perception of the disease, might assist Three questions should be addressed when managing a in securing the patient’s cooperation. Involving local health patient with possible epileptic disorder: workers from the community might help overcome miscon 1. Is it actually an epileptic seizure/epilepsy? ceptions and reduce stigma. 2. Is there an underlying cause for the seizure disorder which can be identified and treated? The Case Continued… 3. Does the patient require antiepileptic drug treatment and for how long should it be given? The patient was started on carbamazepine 200 mg bid. Val The available diagnostic and therapeutic means dictate proic acid was initially requested but the patient could not the clinical procedure. Mimics of epileptic seizures such as afford it. syncope and psychogenic non-epileptic attacks (so-called JC-virus DNA was later detected in the CSF as part of a pseudoseizures) must be considered. Here, the history taken research study, further confirming the suspected diagnosis of from the patient as well as from witnesses and guardians is PML. She was commenced on ART and remained on carbadecisive. Feelings of lightheadedness before the loss of con- mazepine. After 6 months, she remained seizure-free and sciousness, pallor and brief reorientation after the fall are typ- carbamazepine was stopped. After 1 year of ART, the ical for syncope. Psychogenic non-epileptic attacks are patient’s CD 4 count reached 535 cells/μL and she had characterized by eye closure, long duration and bizarre motor returned to work. manifestations. They often occur when the patients are sub SUMMARY BOX jected to emotional stress, such as during spiritual rituals and church masses. Seizure Management in HIV In all patients with unknown HIV status, HIV testing should be performed. In all febrile patients, a CNS infection HIV patients are at risk for developing seizures related to HIVassociated neurological diseases and metabolic disturbances. including cerebral malaria should be ruled out. Opportunis The decision to initiate AEDs in an HIV patient with seizures tic CNS infections should be considered in immunosupdepends on their aetiology and the duration for which the patient pressed patients. In areas with high prevalence of T. remains at risk for seizure activity. If the cause is readily solium, neurocysticercosis should be taken into consider- reversible, such as hypoglycemia, there is no need to initiate ation. In view of the limited resources, the diagnosis will antiepileptic treatment. If the patient has a seizure related to a reversible process of medium duration such as an opportunistic be based on clinical and epidemiological evidence; hence, infection (OI), it is reasonable to initiate an AED and continue it for the knowledge of local distribution and prevalence of possi 3 to 6 months after treatment for the OI has been completed. If a ble causes is helpful. patient develops persistent seizure activity without a reversible When initiating antiepileptic treatment, the issues of cause, then a diagnosis of epilepsy should be given and longavailability, including reliability of supply, affordability term AED will be required. and interactions between AEDs and the patient’s medica- Ideally, one should select an AED that avoids hepatic metabolism because of drug–drug interactions with antiretroviral tions, must be taken into consideration (particularly, antiretherapy. However, this may not be possible in a resource-limited trovirals, antituberculous drugs and contraceptives). setting where the only available drugs are hepatically --- PAGE BREAK -- 2. Siddiqi OK, Elafros MA, Bositis CM, et al. New-onset seizure in metabolized agents such as carbamazepine, phenobarbital and valproic acid. In this case valproic acid is the recommended hiv-infected adult Zambians: a search for causes and consequences. agent, because it is a cytochrome P 450 enzyme inhibitor as Neurology 2017;88(5):477–82. opposed to carbamazepine and phenobarbitone, which are 3. Radhakrishnan K. Challenges in the management of epilepsy in cytochrome P 450 enzyme inducers. When long-term treatment resource-poor countries. Nat Rev Neurol 2009;5(6):323–30. with carbamazepine or phenobarbital is the only option, the 4. Siddiqi O, Birbeck GL. Safe treatment of seizures in the setting of patient needs to be monitored closely for virological failure. HIV/AIDS. Curr Treat Options Neurol 2013;15(4):529–43. 5. Bonello M, Michael BD, Solomon T. Infective causes of epilepsy. Semin Neurol 2015;35(3):235–44. Further Reading 1. Heckmann JE, Bhigjee AI. Tropical neurology. In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 [chapter 71].