76 A 55-Year Old Woman from Turkey With Fever of Unknown Origin ANDREAS J. MORGUET AND THOMAS SCHNEIDER Clinical Presentation Discussion History A 55-year old Turkish woman presents with fever of unknown origin. She has travelled to Turkey shortly before A 55-year-old woman of Turkish provenance presents to a and has a history of double heart valve replacement. Treathospital in Germany with intermittent fever up to 39.5°C ment with co-trimoxazole results in some improvement, (103.1°F), night sweats, chest pain and fatigue. The patient but then the patient develops signs of congestive heart had visited her relatives in Turkey several weeks before. failure. There is a history of rheumatic fever in her childhood and mechanical mitral and aortic valve replacement at the age Answer to Question 1 of 37 and 53 years, respectively (St Jude Medical prostheses). What Are Differential Diagnoses in This Patient Clinical Findings After Deterioration? The patient’s blood pressure and heart rate are within normal Urosepsis could have been the underlying cause of the detelimits. There are unremarkable prosthetic heart sounds and a rioration in this patient. However, urinary tract infection is systolic grade 1 murmur over the aortic area without radia- usually easily managed with a short course of early antibiotic tion. Liver and spleen are not enlarged. No lymph nodes are treatment. The patient’s preceding stay in Turkey should palpable. No haemorrhages or petechiae are detectable. raise the suspicion of another infection not detected so far, such as brucellosis, tuberculosis or Q-fever. Laboratory Results Answer to Question 2 There is slight anaemia (Hb 11.5 g/d L [reference >12 g/d L]). White blood cell count, lymphocyte–neutrophil ratio and What Are the Most Promising Next Diagnostic Steps? platelet count are within normal limits. The C-reactive protein is 15 mg/d L (reference <0.5 mg/d L). Serum creatinine and With two prosthetic heart valves, our patient has an increased transaminases are not elevated. Blood cultures are negative. risk of infective endocarditis. Transoesophageal echocardiog Urinary cultures yield Enterobacteriaceae. raphy is indicated to rule out cardiac involvement. Cultivation of blood cultures should be extended to up to 6 weeks in Additional Investigations culture-negative endocarditis to reveal Brucella or Coxiella species. Chest radiography shows no infiltrates. Transthoracic echocardiography demonstrates competent prosthetic valves. The patient is diagnosed with a urinary tract infection and The Case Continued… treated with co-trimoxazole. Her fever settles and the patient’s After 4 weeks, the blood cultures taken initially grew Brucella condition improves, but she complains of increasing dysmelitensis biovar 2. Transoesophageal echocardiography pnoea and eventually slips into congestive heart failure. revealed a large vegetation attached to the prosthetic mitral Questions valve ( Brucella endocarditis. Treatment with rifampicin, doxycy 1. What are differential diagnoses in this patient after cline and gentamicin was initiated. The patient improved deterioration? rapidly. C-reactive protein returned to normal after 6 weeks 2. What are the most promising next diagnostic steps? of triple therapy. Two months later, however, an annular 212 --- PAGE BREAK -- Symptoms are non-specific, with fever, sweating, fatigue, weight loss, headache and joint pain persisting for weeks or even months. Its presentation as a non-specific febrile illness poses a differential diagnostic challenge in geographical regions where malaria and tuberculosis are highly prevalent and diagnostic resources are scarce, such as in sub-Saharan Africa. In the latter context, brucellosis is frequently missed as a major aetiology of fever, as has been shown from Tanzania. Brucellosis may involve nearly every organ of the body. Although endocarditis is a less common manifestation of the disease, cardiac valve involvement was the most frequent cause of death from brucellosis in the past. Definitive diagnosis requires the isolation of the bacteria from the blood, body fluids or tissues. This can be challenging as culture may take several weeks. In endemic settings, serological tests are often the only available diagnostic test and their inter cornered vegetation (arrow) measuring about 18 mm 7 mm attached Treatment of brucellosis requires combination antibiotic to the posterolateral left atrial side of a St Jude Medical prosthesis in therapy of several weeks’ to several months’ duration to prevent mitral position (LV, left ventricle; LA, left atrium). relapses. The choice of the regimen and treatment duration depend upon clinical course and organ manifestation. Drugs most abscess cavity around the aortic prosthesis was demonstrated commonly used are doxycycline, gentamicin, rifampicin and on echocardiography; the patient at that time was on oral co-trimoxazole. In the case of cardiac valve involvement, spondylitis or neurifampicin and doxycycline. Finally, she gave her consent robrucellosis, extended parenteral antimicrobial therapy is to a third thoracotomy, for prostheses exchange. After sur- recommended. Patients with Brucella endocarditis will frequently gery she made a complete and sustained recovery. require valve replacement in addition to antibiotic therapy. SUMMARY BOX Further Reading Brucellosis 1. Beeching NJ, Madkour MM. Brucellosis. In: Farrar J, editor. Brucellosis is one of the most common zoonotic infections Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 worldwide. Its true incidence is unknown, because it typically [ affects rural communities and it is difficult to diagnose. Hot spots 2. Dean AS, Crump L, Greter H, et al. Global burden of human bruof the disease are Eastern Europe, the Middle East, Central and cellosis: a systematic review of disease frequency. PLo S Negl Trop South Asia, Central and South America and Africa. Dis 2012;6:e 1865. The disease is caused by intracellular bacteria of the genus Brucella. The Brucella species most importantly involved in 3. Dean AS, Crump L, Greter H, et al. Clinical manifestations of human disease are B. melitensis (goats, sheep, camels), B. human brucellosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. PLo S abortus (cattle), B. suis (pigs) and B. canis (dogs). Negl Trop Dis 2012;6:e 1929. Brucellosis is most commonly acquired by eating raw or 4. Crump JA, Morrissey AB, Nicholson WL, et al. Etiology of severe undercooked meat and offal or untreated dairy products. Also, non-malaria febrile illness in Northern Tanzania: a prospective close contact with infected livestock poses a risk. It is an cohort study. PLo S Negl Trop Dis 2013;7:e 2324. important occupational hazard among herdsmen, dairy farmers, 5. Yagupsky P, Morata P, Colmenero JD, et al. Laboratory Diagnosis abattoir workers and laboratory technicians. of Human Brucellosis. Clin Microbiol rev 2019;33:e 00073-19.