78 A 42-Year-Old British Man Living in Malawi With Anaphylactic Shock ANTHONY D. HARRIES Clinical Presentation Questions History 1. Based on the clinical history and examination and investigations done, what are the possible causes of this man’s A 42-year-old British male expatriate who has lived in illness? Malawi for 18 months presents to the local hospital emer 2. How should he be further managed? gency room with a florid itchy rash, difficulty in breathing and a feeling he is going to die. He thinks he might have been Discussion bitten on his ankle by a tick 2 days previously while out walking in the countryside. Twenty-four hours after this event he This male British expatriate presents with the clinical picnoticed a circumscribed, painless, indurated lesion on the ture of anaphylactic shock. He relates this to a tick bite inside of his left ankle and this was accompanied by fever he suffered few days prior. On admission is also febrile and arthralgia. He went to a clinic where a blood film for malaria parasites was reported negative. He was treated with paracetamol. On the day of admission, he developed a widespread itchy rash and shortly afterwards became progressively unable to breathe and felt faint. There was a family history of allergy. He had kept bees in the United Kingdom and had frequently been stung without ill effect. However, 9 months previously he had been bitten by insects while at Lake Malawi and had developed an asthmatic attack which resolved spontaneously over 2 days. Clinical Findings On examination, he is clammy, in a state of collapse and has a widespread urticarial rash. There is respiratory distress and stridor. There is an indurated circumscribed swelling on the inside of his left ankle ( are: temperature 38°C, pulse rate 130 bpm, systolic blood pressure 60 mm Hg. Chest auscultation reveals expiratory wheezes. Laboratory results Haemoglobin 17.4 d/d L; white cell count 6.1 G/L (polymorphs 85 %, lymphocytes 10 %); erythrocyte sedimentation rate 5 mm/hour; blood film negative for malaria parasites; chest radiograph normal; stool and urine microscopy negative. inside of the left ankle. 217 --- PAGE BREAK -- 218 and besides his rash has an erythematous lesion on his slightly puffy, he has a bad headache and a sustained fever of ankle. 38 to 39°C. On direct enquiry, he says he visited a national game park 2 weeks before this current illness where he has suffered numerous painful bites by tsetse flies. The fever, Answer to Question 1 headache, puffy face and erythematous rash suggest trypano Based on the Clinical History and Examination and somiasis and the circumscribed swelling on the ankle is now Investigations Done, What Are the Possible Causes recognized to be a “trypanosomal chancre”. A thick blood of This Man’s Illness? film reveals 5 to 10 trypanosomes per high power field With a story of possible tick bite, a positive family history of and the diagnosis of trypanosomiasis is confirmed. He is allergy, a history of bee keeping, an asthmatic episode after given a test dose of suramin 0.25 g with no ill effect, 0.5 g insect bites 9 months previously in addition to the dramatic 2 days later, 1.0 g another 2 days later and this is followed clinical presentation of urticarial rash and anaphylactic by weekly doses of 1.0 g to a total of 5.75 g suramin without shock, the initial diagnosis was of a possible hypersensitivity ill effect. 24 hours after the first dose of suramin, his cerebroreaction to a tick bite. Other differentials to include are inva- spinal fluid (CSF) is examined by lumbar puncture to assess sive helminthiasis such as acute schistosomiasis (Katayama whether there has been central nervous system invasion – his syndrome), acute fascioliasis and Loeffler’s syndrome (the CSF is normal. His urine is monitored weekly during the suracute pulmonary stage of infection with Ascaris lumbricoides); amin treatment; towards the end of treatment his urine rickettsial disease; and connective tissue disease. Both in shows protein, casts and white cells, but these all disappear allergic reactions and in invasive helminth infections though, a few weeks after treatment has finished. eosinophilia would be typical which is absent in this case. Answer to Question 2 TABLE Standard Treatment for Human African How Should He Be Further Managed? 78.1 Trypanosomiasis by Species and Stage A firm diagnosis has not been made and he needs to remain East African in the hospital under observation receiving treatment as West African trypanosomiasis needed for his intermittent allergic manifestations. trypanosomiasis (T. brucei (T. brucei gambiense) rhodesiense) The Case Continued… First Pentamidine IM or IV OD Suramin IV, 6 stage 7 days injections, e. g. days A diagnosis of anaphylactic shock is made and 0.5 ml of or 0,1,3,7,14, 21. 1:1000 adrenaline is given by deep intramuscular injection Fexinidazole PO OD Or with good effect. He is admitted to hospital and over the next 10 days Pentamidine IM or IV 2 days he is treated with intermittent injections of intramus- OD 7 days cular adrenaline, intravenous hydrocortisone and oral anti Second Nifurtimox-Eflornithine Melarsoprol IV OD histaminics for intermittent episodes of widespread stage combination therapy 10 days urticaria associated with stridor and audible wheezing. (NECT) On day 3 of his hospital admission, his condition changes. (Nifurtimox PO TDS 10 days+ Eflornithine The stridor and wheezing cease, the urticarial rash is replaced IV BD 7 days) by a diffuse erythematous rash ( or Fexinidazole PO OD 10 days IM ¼ intramuscularly, IV ¼ intravenously, PO ¼ orally, OD ¼ once daily, BD ¼ twice daily, TDS ¼ three times a day After Bu€scher, P., et al. 2017. Lancet. SUMMARY BOX Human African Trypanosomiasis (HAT) The patient was diagnosed with HAT. East African trypanosomiasis (Trypanosoma brucei rhodesiense) appears epidemiologically and clinically likely. It is primarily a zoonosis, and animal reservoir hosts include domestic and game animals; its clinical course therefore tends to be rapid with --- PAGE BREAK -- Further Reading trypanosomiasis is considered an anthroponotic disease. The parasite, T. brucei gambiense, is adapted to the human host, causing chronic symptoms and leading to the 1. Burri C, Chappus F, Brun R. Human African Trypanosomiasis. classic picture of “sleeping sickness”, i. e. a chronic pages 606-621. In: Farrar J, Hotez P, Junghanss T, Kang G, encephalopathy. Lalloo D, White NJ, editors. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd The reasons for the dramatic presentation of trypanosomiasis ed. London: Elsevier Saunders; 2013 [ with anaphylaxis as with the case of this patient can only be 2. Thwaites GE, Day NPJ. Approach to fever in the returning traveler. speculative, but his “allergic” preponderance may have made N Engl J Med 2017;376:548–60. https://doi. org/10.1056 / him hypersensitive to the invasive trypanosomes as they NEJMra 1508435. migrated from the subcutaneous tissues of the chancre to the blood. Gold standard of diagnosis is the demonstration 3. Bu€scher P, Cecchi G, Jamonneau V, et al. Human African of trypanosomes in blood smears by microscopy. Why Trypanosomiasis. Lancet 2017;390:2397–2409. https://doi. org/ trypanosomes were not identified in the first blood smear 10.1016 /S 0140-6736(17)31510-6. 24 hours after his illness started is not clear – they may not have 4. World Health Organization. Human African Trypanosomiasis. been present in sufficient numbers in the blood at that stage Available from: http://www. who. int/trypanosomiasis_african/en/. or they may have been missed by the laboratory technician 5. Neuberger A, Meltzer E, Leshem E, et al. The changing epidemiwho was focused on searching for malaria parasites. Suramin ology of Human African Trypanosomiasis among patients from is the treatment of choice for early stage East African Nonendemic countries – 1902-2012. PLo S One 2014;9(2): trypanosomiasis (Table 78.1). It needs to be administered e 88647. https://doi. org/10.1371 /journal. pone.0088647. carefully with an initial test dose in case of hypersensitivity reactions. It is potentially nephrotoxic, hence the need for urine monitoring. In all cases of trypanosomiasis, it is essential to check the CSF for stage determination. It is best to perform the lumbar puncture 24 hours after the first dose of suramin to avoid introducing trypanosomes from the blood into the CSF during lumbar puncture. If there are >5 cells/μl in the CSF or trypanosomes are found, this is considered stage 2 (neurological involvement). Treatment in case of second stage East African trypanosomiasis is with melarsoprol, a trivalent arsenical drug with severe potential toxic effects (Table 78.1).