80 A 62-Year-Old Man from Thailand With a Liver Mass PRAKASIT SA-NGAIMWIBOOL AND YUKIFUMI NAWA Clinical Presentation TABLE Laboratory Results of the Thai Patient With 80.1 a Liver Mass History Parameter Patient Reference A 62-year-old male Thai police sergeant major from Kalasin Province in northeast Thailand presents at an urban hospital AST (U/L) 26 4–36 for his annual physical check-up. On abdominal ultrasonog- ALT (U/L) 32 12–32 raphy, a solitary mass is found in the liver. He denies any ALP (U/L) 84 42–121 clinical symptoms, there is no weight loss, no jaundice and Total bilirubin (mg/d L) 0.6 0.3–1.5 no other gastrointestinal symptoms. He is referred to a hospital in Khon Kaen for further Direct bilirubin (mg/d L) 0.2 0.0–0.5 investigations and treatment. HBs Ag (MEIA) Negative Negative Anti-HBs (ELISA, IU/L) 24.13 0.0–10.0 Clinical Findings HBe Ag (ELISA) Negative Negative He appears in good health and vital signs are normal. Phys Anti-HBc (ELISA) Positive Negative ical examination shows no jaundice. Liver and spleen are not Anti-HCV Negative Negative palpable. No liver stigmata are found nor is any lymphadenopathy detected. AFP (U/m L) 2.8 0.0–10.0 CEA (μg/L) 18.96 0.0–2.5 Laboratory results CA 19-9 (U/m L) 342.80 0.0–37.0 His laboratory results are shown in Table 80.1. Imaging Abdominal MRI reveals a single solid liver mass in the right serology suggests previous infection. The CA 19-9 level is liver lobe (segments VI/VII), Answer to Question 1 Questions What is Your Differential Diagnosis? 1. What is your differential diagnosis? The most important differential diagnoses in this Thai man 2. What additional information should you obtain from the in his sixties are hepatocellular carcinoma, cholangiocarcipatient? noma (CCA), a metastatic tumour and some infections, including tuberculosis. Discussion In an otherwise asymptomatic patient with a high serum CA 19-9 level without a history and signs of chronic viral A 62-year-old asymptomatic Thai man undergoes his annual hepatitis, CCA is the most likely diagnosis. Metastatic cancer physical check-up. Ultrasound incidentally detects a solitary should be considered and thorough investigation is required liver mass. Liver function tests are normal, and Hepatitis B to detect the primary site of the tumour. 223 --- PAGE BREAK -- 224 dilatation is seen. VIII. The dilated bile duct with a small parasite (arrow). The liver parenchyma appears non-cirrhotic; (B) The adjacent dilated bile duct contains a few liver flukes (O. viverrini); and (C) The histology of the tumour shows infiltrative compact glandular structures, lined by dysplastic columnar cells with necrosis. --- PAGE BREAK -- Answer to Question 2 parasites. Adult worms live in the small intrahepatic bile ducts of What Additional Information Should You Obtain their definitive host, which includes humans, cats, dogs and other from the Patient? mammals. They can live in the bile duct for over 20 years and reinfection may occur. Prevalence and intensity of infection increase Kalasin, where the patient comes from, is a province in with age. northeast Thailand. Given his region of origin it is important Chronic infection may lead to periductal fibrosis, cholecystitis to ask for a history of eating raw or undercooked freshwater and gallstones. Mutagenesis is thought to be triggered by chronic fish, which frequently contains metacercariae of the liver mechanical and chemical irritation as well as immunological facfluke, Opisthorchis viverrini. tors. Besides the infection itself, cultural and lifestyle factors have recently been found to be relevant risk factors for CCA; among Traditional food containing undercooked freshwater fish others, a combination of alcohol use and smoking. is usually eaten among the villagers in the region including The complex interaction of risk factors besides fluke infection their children. Exposure to the fluke early in life is an impor- may explain why despite the widespread availability of prazitant risk factor for the development of CCA. Liver fluke quantel and massive control efforts, CCA remains a major health problem in endemic regions in Asia. infection is easily treated with praziquantel; however, CCA may long be asymptomatic, as shown in this case. re-infection is common in an area where traditional food Screening and early detection of CCA is crucial but challenging. is regularly consumed. In Thailand, a comprehensive approach to prevention and control of liver fluke infection has been implemented under the “Cholangiocarcinoma Screening and Care Program” (CASCAP). The Case Continued… Also, Eco Health-based integrated control programmes such as the “Lawa model” have been successfully propagated at the The patient was admitted to the hospital and underwent community level. The “Lawa model” (referring to the flukehemihepatectomy. A large tumour (9 9 cm) of whitish- endemic Lawa lake region in Thailand) is a programme which yellowish colour was found in the right liver lobe. In addi- includes treatment with anthelmintic drugs, intensive health tion, liver flukes were detected in the adjacent bile duct education methods, ecosystem monitoring and active community participation. ( non-cirrhotic. Histology confirmed intrahepatic CCA ( the patient was started on postoperative chemotherapy. Further Reading Additional past medical history taken after surgery revealed that he had a history of liver fluke infection and praziquantel 1. Sithithaworn P, Sripa B, Kaewkes S, et al. Food-borne trematodes. treatment in the past 10 years at the local primary care unit. In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical Infectious Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 [ SUMMARY BOX 2. Sithithaworn P, Andrews RH, De NV, et al. The current status of opisthorchiasis and clonorchiasis in the Mekong Basin. Parasitol Int 2012;61(1):10–6. Cholangiocarcinoma 3. Sripa B, Tangkawattana S, Sangnikul T. The lawa model: a sustain CCA is strongly associated with chronic liver fluke infection. O. able, integrated opisthorchiasis control program using the Ecoviverrini and Clonorchis sinensis are therefore classified by WHO Health approach in the lawa lake region of Thailand. Parasitol as biological carcinogens. The Greater Mekong subregion has the highest reported Int 2017;66(4):346–54. incidence of liver fluke-associated CCA in the world. It is also 4. Khuntikeo N, Titapun A, Loilome W, et al. Current perspectives endemic in East Asia (southern China, Korea, northern Vietnam) on opisthorchiasis control and cholangiocarcinoma detection in because of C. sinensis infection, and in Kazakhstan, Siberia, other Southeast Asia. Front Med (Lausanne) 2018;5:117. parts of Russia and various European countries, where O. felineus 5. Steele JA, Richter CH, Echaubard P, et al. Thinking beyond is the major parasite. Opisthorchis viverrini for risk of cholangiocarcinoma in the lower The infection is acquired by eating raw freshwater fish and Mekong region: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Infect Dis uncooked fermented fish containing metacercariae of the Poverty 2018;7:44.