83 An 18-Year-Old Man from India With a Pale Patch on His Right Upper Limb STEPHEN L. WALKER AND SABA M. LAMBERT Answer to Question 1 Clinical Presentation What Common Skin Conditions Cause History Hypopigmentation? An 18-year-old man from India has noticed a pale patch on Hypopigmented skin lesions are very common. Hypopighis right arm and forearm for 3 months. It is not itchy or mentation may be a non-specific sequela of any inflammapainful, but he reports reduced sensation in the affected area. tory or traumatic process such as dermatitis or a burn. He also complains of mild numbness of the little finger of the right hand but no weakness (he is right-handed). Otherwise he is well. There is no family history of skin problems. Clinical Findings There is a 20 cm by 10 cm hypopigmented macule on the outer aspect of the right arm extending on to the forearm ( the hypopigmented area is reduced compared with the normally pigmented skin. The rest of the skin examination is normal. Both ulnar nerves are palpable, however the right ulnar nerve is thickened. There is reduced sensation on the tip and ulnar border of the right little finger. There are no other neurological abnormalities. Questions 1. What common skin conditions cause hypopigmentation? 2. What further investigations are required? Discussion An 18-year-old man from India presents with a hypopigmented macular lesion on the right arm with reduced sensation. A hypopigmented anaesthetic patch is a cardinal sign of leprosy. The combination of a skin problem and signs of a neuropathy should always raise the suspicion of leprosy. tion on the right arm of an 18-year-old Indian male. 232 --- PAGE BREAK -- Common causes of hypopigmentation include pityriasis Individuals with high cell-mediated immunity develop tuberculoid alba, pityriasis versicolor and seborrheic dermatitis. Vitiligo leprosy or borderline tuberculoid leprosy with one or a few causes depigmentation rather than hypopigmentation. In hypopigmented anaesthetic skin patches and thickened leprosy-endemic countries any skin problem causing reduced peripheralnerves. Bacteria are usually not seeninthe skinbiopsies or slit-skin smears of these individuals. Individuals who do not pigmentation may cause an individual to seek advice because mount a cell-mediated response to M. leprae develop of concern about leprosy. Leprosy awareness campaigns lepromatous leprosy with infiltration of the skin and many skin often advise people to get pale patches checked. lesions. These individuals have lots of bacteria in their skin and nasal secretions. The World Health Organization categorises leprosy according Answer to Question 2 to the number of skin lesions for the purpose of treatment with What Additional Investigations are Required? multi-drug therapy. Individuals with paucibacillary leprosy (five skin lesions or fewer) are treated for 6 months and those with No additional investigations are required because the patient multibacillary leprosy (six or more) for 12 months (Table 83.1). In has the two clinical cardinal signs of leprosy – a hypopigmen- 2018, the WHO recommended that all leprosy patients receive ted skin lesion with reduced sensation and a thickened nerve. treatment with three drugs. The WHO regime is rifampicin However, where available, clinicians may elect to perform a 600 mg, clofazimine 300 mg, dapsone 100 mg once per month and dapsone 100 mg and clofazimine 50 mg daily on the other skin biopsy and slit-skin smears. In this case a skin biopsy is days (Table 83.2). Prior to this, patients with paucibacillary leprosy likely to show granulomatous dermatitis with destruction of received two drugs (dapsone and rifampicin) for 6 months. Multicutaneous nerves and a slit-skin smear is likely to be negative. drug therapy is provided free of charge to patients. Individuals with recent onset of sensory or motor loss The Case Continued… (defined as within the last 6 months) are treated with oral corticosteroids, in addition to multi-drug therapy, to improve nerve function. In rare circumstances leprosy may manifest The patient was diagnosed with paucibacillary leprosy and without skin changes – pure neural leprosy – which makes the commenced on rifampicin and dapsone which he took for diagnosis challenging. 6 months. The sensory neuropathy was treated with oral The diagnosis of leprosy remains largely clinical as there is no prednisolone 30 mg daily which was reduced by 5 mg each diagnostic or screening test for all cases. Presentations and clinical forms are very varied. The majority of individuals with month. The patient was counselled extensively about the leprosy do not have identifiable bacteria in slit-skin smears or cause of leprosy and that he was not an infection risk to skin biopsies. his family or friends, who were examined and had no signs of leprosy. He was advised how to care for his hands and avoid trauma. He made a full recovery. Further Reading TABLE WHO Classification of Leprosy and 1. Walker SL, Withington SJ, Lockwood DNG. Leprosy. In: Farrar J, 83.1 Recommended Duration of Treatment editor. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; Number of Duration of 2013 [ Classification Patches Treatment 2. The World Health Organization. Guidelines for the Diagnosis, Treatment and Prevention of Leprosy. New Delhi: WHO, Paucibacillary 5 6 months Regional Office for South-East Asia; 2018. Available at:http:// nlep. nic. in/pdf/WHO%20 Guidelines%20 for%20 leprosy. pdf (accessed 11 October 2019). 3. Lockwood DNJ, Lambert S, Srikantam A, et al. Three drugs are TABLE unnecessary for treating paucibacillary leprosy-A critique of the WHO Treatment of Leprosy (2018) 83.2 WHO guidelines. PLo S Negl Trop Dis 2019;13(10):e 0007671. https://doi. org/10.1371 /journal. pntd.0007671. Once Monthly All Other Days Daily 4. Saleem MD, Oussedik E, Picardo M, et al. Acquired disorders with hypopigmentation: a clinical approach to diagnosis and treatment. Rifampicin 600 mg J Am Acad Dermatol 2019;80(5):1233–50. Clofazimine 300 mg 50 mg Dapsone 100 mg 100 mg SUMMARY BOX Leprosy Leprosy is a disease predominantly of the skin and peripheral nerves caused by Mycobacterium leprae (and Mycobacterium lepromatosis). The organisms cannot be grown in culture. The vast majority of individuals exposed to the infection do not develop clinical disease, but those who dodevelop a variety of clinical signs determined by their immunological response to the bacteria.