84 A 64-Year-Old Japanese Man With Generalized Tonic-Clonic Seizures MASAHIDE YOSHIKAWA, FUMIHIKO NISHIMURA, YUKITERU OUJI AND HIROYUKI NAKASE Clinical Presentation Questions History 1. What is the cause of sparganosis? 2. What is the treatment of choice for cerebral sparganosis? A 64-year-old Japanese man is admitted to a local hospital in Japan because of generalized tonic-clonic seizures followed Discussion by weakness of the right lower extremity. He has a medical history of hypertension and right cere A 64-year old Japanese man presents with a generalized bellar infarction; however, recent simple partial seizures were tonic-clonic seizure. Imaging reveals an elongated structure well controlled by administration of an antiepileptic agent. in the right occipital lobe. During neurosurgery, a live worm-like structure is removed from the brain, identified Clinical Findings as a sparganum. On admission, the patient is afebrile, GCS is 15 /15 and the Answer to Question 1 neurological examination does not reveal any abnormality. What is the Cause of Sparganosis? Spargana are the larvae of zoonotic tapeworms of the genus Laboratory Results Spirometra. Adult worms inhabit the intestines of cats and dogs, and produce eggs that are discharged in faeces. In fresh Laboratory results show no abnormalities, including no water, coracidia hatch from the eggs to be ingested by copeeosinophilia or leukocytosis. pods and develop into first stage (procercoid) larvae. When copepods are ingested by the second intermediate Imaging host (e. g. frogs, fish, snakes, birds), the procercoid larvae mature into plerocercoid sparganum larvae and migrate to Head CT reveals a small high-density nodule with an the muscle and subcutaneous tissue. The cycle is completed enhanced perifocal low-density area in the left occipital lobe. when a carnivorous mammal eats the second intermediate MRI shows a ring-enhancing, tunnel-shaped lesion in the host. left occipital lobe ( Angiography findings are normal, except for right verte- ond intermediate host, i. e. by drinking water containing bral artery occlusion, reflecting the history of right cerebellar infected copepods, eating undercooked meat from infected infarction. snakes, frogs, or birds, or by the use of poultices produced from infested frog or snake flesh or skin on open wounds or eyes. Further Investigations In the human body, the sparganum commonly migrates Open surgery with craniotomy targeting the lesion is per- into subcutaneous tissue or muscle, and sometimes into the formed. With manipulation of the aspirator and forceps, a eye, the spinal cord or brain, the latter resulting in cerebral white tape-like body at the centre of the targeted lesion is sparganosis. The infection route in the present case was probexposed, and complete removal of a live worm-like structure ably through consumption of raw chicken meat, which the is carefully performed ( of sparganosis is made. ized seizure. 234 --- PAGE BREAK -- occipital lobe. B. T 2-weighted image showing an area of hyperintensity associated with an adjacent ventricular dilation. C, D. Post-contrast coronal and sagittal T 1-weighted images demonstrating a tunnel-shaped enhancement, so-called tunnel sign. from the cortex. B. Whole body of extracted sparganum with anterior end enclosed by red square. The sparganum was wrinkled and whitish, and measured 1 to 3 mm in width and up to 12.5 cm in length at maximum extension. C. Five successive images from video recording. The anterior end showed active repeated movements of extension and constriction. Cerebral sparganosis is a rare disease, but should be con- South Korea, Thailand and Japan, and the most commonly sidered in patients from endemic areas presenting with symp- observed clinical manifestation is epileptic seizures. Diagnotoms suggestive of a space-occupying lesion. Cases have been sis is based upon dependable history taking and serological mainly reported from Asian countries, especially China, investigations. Neuroimaging, especially MRI, is helpful --- PAGE BREAK -- 236 for the diagnosis of cerebral sparganosis. The most character Most cases occur in Asia, but sporadic cases have been istic finding is the “tunnel sign” in post-contrast MRI, which reported from many other parts of the world. appears as hypointensity in T 1-weighted and hyperintensity Cerebral infestation may manifest like any space-occupying in T 2-weighted images. lesion with headache, confusion, seizures, paraesthesias or palsies. Spinal sparganosis may lead to paraplegia, as well as urinary and bowel incontinence. Answer to Question 2 Diagnosis of cerebral sparganosis is made on the basis of a combination of clinical history, laboratory tests (eosinophilia, What is the Treatment of Choice for Cerebral positive serology), CT and MRI, and histopathology findings Sparganosis? including the identification of the larva itself, if available. Recent advances in imaging technology, especially MRI, are key for The treatment of choice is the removal of the sparganum diagnosis. from the brain. However, in a small-sample non-randomized Differential diagnoses include brain tumours or metastases, retrospective study, high-dose praziquantel had an efficacy neurocysticercosis, cerebral schistosomiasis and similar to that of surgical removal with respect to the primary paragonimiasis. outcome (complete disappearance of active lesions in cere- An HIV test should be done in any person with unclear CNS lesions. In immunocompromised patients, cerebral toxoplasbral MRI findings). mosis has to be considered, as well as cerebral cryptococcomas and tuberculomas. The Case Continued… After surgical removal of the worm, the patient was well Further Reading without seizures at the most recent examination. Enzymelinked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) results of serum and 1. Baily G, Garcia HH. Other cestode infections: intestinal cestodes, cerebrospinal fluid revealed strong positivity for Spirometra cysticercosis, other larval cestode infections. In: Farrar J, editor. mansoni. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 [ SUMMARY BOX 2. Liu Q, Li MW, Wang ZD, et al. Human sparganosis, a neglected food borne zoonosis. Lancet Infect Dis 2015;15(10):1226–35. Cerebral Sparganosis 3. Song T, Wang WS, Zhou BR, et al. CT and MR characteristics of cerebral sparganosis. Am J Neuroradiol 2007;28(9):1700–5. Cerebral sparganosis is the infestation of the human brain by 4. Li YX, Ramsahye H, Yin B, et al. Migration: A Notable Feature of larvae of a zoonotic cestode of carnivorous mammals. It is a food-borne zoonosis acquired by drinking untreated freshwater Cerebral Sparganosis on Follow-Up MR Imaging. Am J Neuroraor eating undercooked meat of snakes and frogs or by appli- diol 2013;34(2):327–33. cation of infested flesh on open wounds or the eyes during 5. Hong D, Xie H, Wan H, et al. Efficacy comparison between longmedical procedures. The incubation period is 6 to 11 days but term high-dose praziquantel and surgical therapy for cerebral sparmay be longer. The larvae can survive in the human host for up to ganosis: a multicenter retrospective cohort study. PLo S Negl Trop 20 years. Dis 2018;12(10):e 0006918.