85 A 55-Year-Old Female Pig Farmer from Vietnam With Fever and Impaired Consciousness THI THUY NGAN NGUYEN AND JEREMY DAY Clinical Presentation History A 55-year-old woman presents to a hospital in rural Vietnam with a 1-day history of fever, headache and vomiting. Her blood film is negative for malaria and she is treated with fluids and paracetamol. On the second day of illness she develops confusion and is referred to a hospital in Ho Chi Minh City for further investigation. The patient has a history of type 2 diabetes and hypertension, she has been on treatment for 4 years. She raises pigs on her smallholding and works as a butcher in a local market selling pork and chicken. Clinical Findings On admission, she is confused with a Glasgow Coma Score of 12 /15 (E 3 M 5 V 4), there is fever (38.5°C or 101.3°F), tachycardia (124 bpm), hypotension (85 /60 mm Hg), tachypnoea (32 breaths per minute), and hypoxia (O satu 2 ration 86 % on ambient air). She has neck stiffness and photophobia. There are no focal neurological signs. She has a diffuse petechial rash over her trunk ( purpuric non-blanching lesions on her left leg ( The rest of her examination is unremarkable. Laboratory Results Her laboratory results on admission are shown in Table 85.1. Further Investigations Non-contrast-enhanced CT scan of the brain is unremarkable. Electrocardiogram shows sinus tachycardia and is otherwise normal. Chest x-ray is unremarkable. 237 --- PAGE BREAK -- 238 of community-acquired sepsis, and diabetes is known to be a abscess and encephalitis. However, melioidosis is compara Parameter Patient Reference tively rare in Vietnam, where the true burden of disease WBC ( 109 /L) 10.25 4–10 remains to be elucidated. The most likely diagnosis though seems to be acute bac% Neutrophils 86.5 45–75 terial meningitis complicated by septic shock. Globally, the Haemoglobin (g/d L) 11.8 12–17 common causes of acute bacterial meningitis are Streptococcus Platelets ( 109 /L) 56 200–400 pneumoniae, Neisseria meningitidis, and Haemophilus influenzae. Both S. pneumoniae and N. meningitidis infections can Creatinine (mg/d L) 0.86 0.7–1.5 be complicated by development of a purpuric rash; this is Blood urea nitrogen (mg/d L) 7 7–20 more common with N. meningitidis septicemia. Na+ (mmol/l) 137 135–150 In Vietnam, however, the commonest identified cause of acute bacterial meningitis in adults is Streptococcus suis. Like K+ (mmol/l) 3.2 3.5–5.5 its counterparts, S. suis infection can cause both meningitis Random blood glucose (mmol/L) 15.4 3.9–7.8 and septic shock; the syndromes overlap. A florid purpuric Hb A 1 c (%) 8.5 4–7 rash is common (6 %–31 % of patient cases). Lactate (mmol/L) 11.2 0.5–2.2 Other forms of meningitis seen in Asia and the tropics include tuberculous and cryptococcal meningitis. Although each of these tends to have a more insidious onset, the duration of symptoms before presentation can be as short as 4 to 5 days; these diagnoses therefore should always be considered. Questions However, they are not associated with shock or purpuric rash. Meningitis is a medical emergency requiring prompt 1. What is the differential diagnosis and what empirical treatment. Lumbar puncture is the investigation of choice treatment would you give? but should not delay administration of broad-spectrum 2. What additional investigations are needed? intravenous antibiotics. A typical choice is ceftriaxone; where resistance is suspected or common epidemiologically, vanco Discussion mycin is also administered. The value of adjunctive corticosteroids in acute bacterial meningitis is difficult to generalize. This middle-aged Vietnamese woman from a rural area pre Large studies in Africa found no benefit; this contrasts with sents with a syndrome consistent with meningitis compli Western Europe, where steroids reduced the risk of death, cated by shock. She has a widespread non-blanching and Vietnam, where in microbiologically confirmed disease purpuric rash. they reduced the risk of complications. Answer to Question 1 What is the Differential Diagnosis and What Answer to Question 2 Empirical Treatment Would You Give? What Additional Investigations are Needed? The patient presented at the rural district hospital with fever The patient requires a lumbar puncture and blood cultures. and malaise and developed confusion. There is malaria in CSF should be sent for microscopy, Gram stain, cell count, rural Vietnam and both P. falciparum and P. vivax are protein, glucose and culture. A simultaneous blood glucose endemic; therefore severe malaria must be excluded. Enteric measurement should be performed. If resources are limited, fever, an important disease in low-income tropical countries, then CSF glucose with simultaneous blood glucose is the can cause confusion and should be considered, but the rate of most important test informing clinical management, because disease progression in this case is uncharacteristic. Dengue a normal ratio (i. e. a CSF/serum glucose ratio of 0.6) excludes fever is endemic in South-east Asia and should also be con- acute bacterial meningitis and TB. In both bacterial and Tb sidered. Skin changes in dengue usually present with tran- meningitis, the CSF/serum glucose ratio is expected to be sient flushing erythema of the face followed by a diffuse markedly diminished. Rapid diagnostic tests such as pneuerythematous, blanching rash on days 3 to 6. A small propor- mococcal antigen can be performed on CSF, blood or urine, tion of patients develop severe disease during a second, and meningococcal polymerase chain reaction on blood or immune-mediated phase (usually on day 4–6). This phase CSF if available. Because the patient is from a malariamay be complicated by capillary leak, shock, mucocutaneous endemic area, the blood film should be repeated. bleeding and organ involvement. Dengue may also present as encephalitis. The Case Continued… In this case the rapid deterioration with signs of meningitis and shock is not typical for dengue. The patient received empirical treatment with intravenous Melioidosis is another differential diagnosis to consider. ceftriaxone and vancomycin, and supportive treatment In some areas of South-east Asia, it is the commonest cause including intravenous fluids. Lumbar puncture revealed --- PAGE BREAK -- turbid cerebrospinal fluid with 2870 cells/μL (<5), 92 % Outbreaks of severe sepsis have been reported from China. The neutrophils, protein 541.16 mg/d L (15–45) and CSF glu- prevalence of disease in Asia is probably driven by farming and cose 2.44 mmol/l (2.5–4.4). Blood glucose was 19 mmol/ food practices; disease is more common in those in contact with L (3.9–6.1), CSF/serum glucose ratio 0.12 (normal 0.6). pigs and raw pork. Infection is rare in children because culturally they are protected from contact with pigs. Antibiotic resistance is Gram stain showed a Gram-positive coccus in short rarely reported in human isolates. First-line treatment is ceftrichains, and negative India ink, mycobacterial Gene Xpert axone; adjunctive treatment with steroids reduces the risk for and Herpes simplex virus PCR. Repeat malaria film and deafness in adults, which occurs in up to 70 %. malaria rapid diagnostic tests were negative. Five days later, both blood and CSF cultures grew S. suis, sensitive to penicillin and ceftriaxone. Further Reading The patient received 12 days of antibiotic therapy. Dexamethasone was administered for the first 4 days of treatment. 1. Mai NT, Hoa NT, Nga TV, et al. Streptococcus suis meningitis in She responded to treatment but had residual bilateral hearing adults in Vietnam. Clin Infect Dis 2008;46(5):659–67. impairment. 2. Nghia HD, Tu Le TP, Wolbers M, et al. Risk factors of Streptococcus suis infection in Vietnam. A case-control study. PLo S SUMMARY BOX One 2011;6(3):e 17604. 3. Yu H, Jing H, Chen Z, et al. Human Streptococcus suis outbreak, Streptococcus suis meningitis Sichuan. China Emerg Infect Dis 2006;12(6):914–20. 4. Nguyen TH, Tran TH, Thwaites G, et al. Dexamethasone in Viet S. suis is the most frequently confirmed cause of acute bacterial namese adolescents and adults with bacterial meningitis. N Engl J meningitis in adults in Vietnam. Globally, it is an economically Med 2007;357(24):2431–40. important zoonotic pathogen of pigs causing septicaemia, joint 5. de Gans J, van de Beek D. European Dexamethasone in Adulthood and genitourinary tract infections. Human disease is almost exclusively caused by serotype 2. It is reported globally but Bacterial Meningitis Study. Dexamethasone in adults with bacterial seems particularly frequent in East and South-east Asia. meningitis. N Engl J Med 2002;347(20):1549–56.