86 A 14-Year-Old Girl in the Solomon Islands With a Non-Healing Leg Ulcer MICHAEL MARKS AND ORIOL MITIÀ Clinical Presentation was noted. There was no regional lymphadenopathy or evidence of any other skin or bone lesions. History Laboratory results A 14-year-old girl was seen in the Solomon Islands. She reported a painless, non-healing large ulcer of her left leg that A rapid plasma reagin (RPR) test was positive at a titre of began 1 month earlier. 1:64 (Normal – Negative). Clinical Findings Questions On examination there was a large lesion (approximately 3 cm 1. What is the most likely diagnosis when the patient first diameter) on the left lower leg covered by a layer of crust presents and how should she be treated? ( 2. How would you manage her? How should she be followed up? Discussion A 14-year-old girl from the Solomon Islands presenting with a chronic leg ulcer. Answer to Question 1 What is the Most Likely Diagnosis When the Patient First Presents and How Should She Be Treated? The patient has a clinical lesion suspicious for yaws, which is still a common problem in the West Pacific. The satellite lesion on the leg is also very typical of early yaws lesions. The patient has a high-titre positive RPR test which is consistent with the diagnosis. A number of other bacteria, in particular Haemophilus ducreyi, can cause skin lesions that clinically appear similar to those of early yaws. Other relevant differential diagnoses are pyoderma, tropical ulcer, cutaneous diphtheria, and Aeromonas hydrophila infection. Answer to Question 2 How Would You Manage Her? How Should She Be Followed Up? A single oral dose of azithromycin (30 mg/kg single dose; maximum dose 2 g) or a single intramuscular (IM) dose of 240 --- PAGE BREAK -- units single dose; 10 years of age: 1.2 million units single that ulcerates. Secondary lesions appear from a few weeks to dose) is the treatment of choice. A four-fold fall in titre at 2 years after the primary lesion and may include a variety of skin 6 months indicates cure. lesions. Arthralgias and malaise are the most common additional symptoms and may be accompanied by early osteoperiostitis of the proximal phalanges of the fingers (dactylitis) or long bones The Case Continued… (forearm, tibia, or fibula). Late-stage disease is characterized by destructive lesions of soft tissues and bones. Diagnosis is pre She was treated with a single IM dose of benzathine benzyl- dominantly based on serology and relies on both treponemal penicillin and the skin lesion resolved over the next 10 days. tests (such as the Treponema pallidum particle agglutination The patient was seen again at the hospital 12 months later assay, TPPA) and non-treponemal tests (such as RPR test). Benzathine benzylpenicillin and azithromycin are the treatments with a similar ulcer on the right leg. of choice, with the latter the preferred drug to use in mass The RPR test was repeated and was positive at a titre of treatment campaigns. A four-fold fall in the RPR titre over 1:8. Given a greater than four-fold fall in the RPR titre this 6 months (for example from 1:64 to 1:16) is considered to was considered cure after the recent treatment. The other leg indicate cure. Similar lesions to those of early yaws may be ulcer was therefore interpreted to be of a different aetiology. caused by other bacteria, in particular H. ducreyi, but PCR is required to make this diagnosis. SUMMARY BOX Further Reading Yaws Yaws is a chronic infectious disease caused by Treponema pallidum subspecies pertenue, which is spread by skin-to-skin 1. Salazar JC, Bennett NJ. Endemic treponematosis including yaws contact in warm, humid environments. In the Pacific region, and other spirochaetes. In: farrar j, editor. Manson’s tropical disyaws remains highly endemic in the Solomon Islands, Papua eases. 23 rd ed. London: Elsevier; 2013 [ New Guinea and Vanuatu, as well as in Indonesia and Timor- 2. Mitjà O, Asiedu K. Mabey D. Yaws Lancet 2013;381:763–73. Leste. There is also evidence for a re-emergence of yaws in the 3. Mitjà O, Houinei W, Moses P, et al. Mass treatment with single Philippines were the disease was considered eradicated since dose azithromycin for yaws. N Engl J Med 2015;372:703–10. the 1970 s. The disease is also still endemic in parts of West and 4. Marks M, Chi K-H, Vahi V, et al. Haemophilus ducreyi associated Central Africa. Yaws is normally seen in young children; it is with skin ulcers among children, Solomon Islands. Emerg Infect associated with overcrowding and poor hygiene. The disease Dis 2014;20:1705–7. consists of primary, secondary and tertiary phases. The primary 5. Mitjà O, Godornes C, Houinei W, et al. Re-emergence of yaws lesion usually starts as a localized papule 2 to 10 weeks after after single mass azithromycin treatment followed by targeted treatinoculation. Common sites are the lower legs and the face. The papule may develop into a large nodule 2 to 5 cm in diameter ment: a longitudinal study. Lancet 2018;391:1599–607.