88 A 74-Year-Old Man from Japan With Fever, Nausea and Drowsiness KOHSUKE MATSUI, KENSUKE TAKAHASHI, KOYA ARIYOSHI AND CHRIS SMITH Clinical Presentation distress. Laboratory results show elevated AST/ALT, LDH, CK and low platelets. History Answer to Question 1 74-year-old Japanese man is brought to a hospital with a history of fever, joint pain, headache, and nausea over the past What Are Your Differential Diagnosis and 5 days. He has a history of cerebral infarction without neu- Diagnostic Approach? rological sequelae, hypertension and ulcerative colitis. He is Acute fever with respiratory distress and impaired conscioustaking antiplatelet, and antihypertensive medicine and sub- ness are signs of sepsis. Pneumonia, meningitis or infective cutaneous injection of the TNF-alpha Blocker adalimumab endocarditis need to be investigated as soon as possible. In once every 2 weeks. addition, considering the patient’s lifestyle and habitat, He lives in a suburb of a city in Kyushu district, south- tick- and mite-borne infectious diseases should be included western Japan and has opportunities to encounter wild ani- in the differential diagnosis. There are two rickettsial infecmals such as boars and deer. He is retired and does grape tions and one viral infection that are transmitted by mites or farming once in a while. ticks, respectively, in Japan: Japanese spotted fever (caused He does not have any recent history of overseas travel. by Rickettsia japonica), scrub typhus (caused by Orientia tsutsugamushi) and severe fever with thrombocytopenia Clinical findings syndrome (SFTS). SFTS should be suspected when a patient at risk of tick bite On examination the patient looks unwell and drowsy. His develops acute fever with thrombocytopenia or pancytopenia, body temperature is 37°C (98.6°F), pulse rate 101 bpm, abnormal liver function tests, and an elevated serum creatinine blood pressure 120 /70 mm Hg, Sp O 96 % with 7 l oxygen, 2 kinase. SFTS and rickettsioses are sometimes difficult to and respiratory rate 32 breaths per minute. Chest examination is normal. The Glasgow Coma Scale on arrival is 13 /15 (E 3 V 4 M 6). There is livedo reticularis bilaterally on his lower TABLE extremities but otherwise no rash is seen. His left inguinal Laboratory Results on Admission 88.1 lymph node is enlarged. Parameter Patient Reference Range Laboratory results WBC ( 109 /L) 5.3 3.3–8.6 His laboratory results on admission are shown in Table 88.1. Haemoglobin (g/d L) 17.7 13.7–16.8 Platelets ( 109 /L) 90 158–348 Questions AST (U/L) 413 13–30 1. What are your differential diagnosis and diagnostic ALT (U/L) 95 10–42 approach? LDH (U/L) 1025 124–222 2. How would you manage this patient? CK (U/L) 7442 59–248 Discussion CK-MB (U/L) 41 0–15 A 74-year-old man living in south-western Japan presents CRP (mg/d L) 0.1 0.00–0.14 with fever, arthralgia, impaired consciousness and respiratory 245 --- PAGE BREAK -- 246 differentiate from each other because both show similar clinical manifestations and laboratory results. In this case, however, a SUMMARY BOX negative CRP is suggestive of SFTS rather than rickettsiosis. Diagnosis of SFTS is confirmed by detecting SFTS virus Severe Fever With Thrombocytopenia in blood serum by PCR. It is reported that real-time Syndrome (SFTS) RT-PCR of serum is 98.6 % sensitive and 99.1 % specific. SFTS is an emerging infectious disease caused by infection with the SFTS virus and transmitted by tick bites. The first case was Answer to Question 2 reported in China in 2009; and since then, cases have been reported in both Japan and Korea. As of 2019, 491 cases had How Would You Manage This Patient? been reported in Japan from when the first case was reported in 2012. Symptomatic and supportive treatment such as adequate The SFTS virus belongs to the family Bunyaviridae, which also fluid administration and respiratory support play an essential includes the Crimean Congo haemorrhagic fever virus and role in management. Vasopressors should be started if the hantavirus. Its incubation period is 6 to 14 days. Despite being patient develops hypotension. Laboratory results have to a tick-borne disease, it is reported that an eschar is rarely seen. be monitored closely because there are risks of worsening Clinical manifestations of SFTS include fever, nausea, diarrhoea, arthralgia, myalgia and neurological symptoms. Laboratory thrombocytopenia, disseminated intravascular coagulation, results typically show leukopenia, thrombocytopenia and elemulti-organ failure and haemophagocytic syndrome. Antibivated serum AST, ALT, LDH and CK levels. Patients sometimes otics should be administered until the PCR result is available develop multi-organ failure and hemophagocytic syndrome, and other infectious diseases have been ruled out. which results in a high case-fatality rate. Medical staff should be aware that there is a chance of Supportive treatment is the main treatment strategy. There is no effective antiviral agent against SFTS. Patients require close human-to-human transmission through blood or body monitoring of their respiratory condition and blood pressure. fluids. Contact precaution is needed until the SFTS viral load Adequate fluid administration, close monitoring and management becomes undetectable. of thrombocytopenia, haemophagocytic syndrome and secondary bacterial infection are important. The Case Continued… The case-fatality rate has been reported to range from 6.3 % to 30 % in China and be 23.2 % in Japan. Older age, impaired consciousness and high serum LDH and CK levels are associated The patient was intubated and admitted to the intensive care with high lethality. unit immediately. Meropenem and vancomycin were initiated for possible bacterial sepsis. His blood sample was sent Further Reading to the reference laboratory, and SFTS virus PCR came back positive. Antibiotics were subsequently discontinued because 1. Sun Y, Liang M, Qu J, et al. Early diagnosis of novel SFTS bunyano bacterial infection was identified. virus infection by quantitative real-time RT-PCR assay. J Clin Virol Despite adequate fluid administration and other support- 2012;53:48–53. ive therapies, the patient experienced worsening of his respi 2. Kim WY, Choi W, Park SW, et al. Nosocomial transmission of ratory condition and protracted hypotension for a week. severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome in Korea. Clin Infect Noradrenaline was initiated, and then hydrocortisone 200 Dis 2015;60:1681–3. mg/day was added for non-responsive septic shock before 3. Kida K, Matsuoka Y, Shimoda T, et al. A Case report of cat-tohe started showing gradual improvement. His platelet count human transmission of severe fever with Thrombocytopenia syndecreased to 65 109 /L on day 4 of admission but subse- drome. Jpn J Infect Dis 2019;72:356–8. https://doi. org/ quently recovered to the normal level. His CK was highest 10.7883 /yoken. JJID.2018.526. 4. Yasukawa M. Diagnosis and treatment of SFTS (In Japanese). Jpn on admission and decreased to the normal level on day 7. J Chemother 2017;65:558–63. He was extubated on day 12 and discharged on day 35 5. Liu Q, He B, Huang SY, et al. Severe fever with thrombocytopenia without any sequelae. syndrome, an emerging tick-borne zoonosis. Lancet Infect Dis 2014;14:763–72.