89 A 30-Year-Old Woman from Bolivia With Exertional Dyspnoea ISRAEL MOLINA Clinical Presentation failure. However, CXR shows moderate cardiomegaly and there is sinus bradycardia with right bundle branch block History on her ECG. A 30-year-old woman presents to the outpatient clinic of a Answer to Question 1 hospital in Spain. She was born in Santa Cruz (Bolivia) In a Recent Migrant from Bolivia, Which Different and arrived in Europe 4 months prior. She has been living Pathologies Should Be Screened For? in an urban environment for the past 20 years but grew up in a rural area during her childhood. Following the guidelines of the European Centre for Disease She reports a 2-year history of progressive dyspnoea at Prevention and Control (ECDC), newly arrived migrants moderate exertion (New York Heart Association grade II) from highly endemic countries should be offered a screening along with self-limiting palpitations. She has no other rele- panel including screening for active and latent tuberculosis, vant medical history and does not take any medication. HIV, hepatitis B, hepatitis C and strongyloidiasis. In She expresses the wish to become pregnant. migrants from Latin America, especially from Bolivia, this screening panel should include Chagas disease, because prev Clinical Findings alence rates are high and Chagas may be asymptomatic. If a chronic phase of Chagas disease is suspected, screen On examination, the blood pressure is 110 /65 mm Hg. The ing is usually performed with serological testing through pulse is regular at 40 bpm. Sp O 2 is 99 % on ambient air. On detection of Ig G antibodies against Trypanosoma cruzi using auscultation, cardiac sounds are clear and there are no mur- two different serological testing methods. murs. The chest is clear. There is no peripheral oedema and the jugular venous pressure is not raised. Answer to Question 2 Laboratory Results If a Patient Was Diagnosed With Chagas Disease, How Would You Proceed to Assess Organ Full blood count and basic blood chemistry tests are normal. Involvement? Which Are the Indications for Her ECG is shown in Figure 89.1. Her chest radiograph is Treatment of Chagas Disease? shown in Figure 89.1 B. The heart is the most frequently affected organ. Alterations Questions most commonly seen include conduction disorders such as bundle branch blocks and sinus node dysfunction 1. In a recent migrant from Bolivia, which different pathol- ( ogies should be screened for? cardiomyopathy ( 2. If a patient was diagnosed with Chagas disease, how is less common and manifestations comprise motility disorwould you proceed to assess organ involvement? Which ders or megaviscera. are the indications for treatment of Chagas disease? As a general approach it is therefore reasonable to start with an ECG, chest x-ray and barium enema. In addition, Discussion referral to a cardiologist for echocardiography and 24-hour Holter ECG would be recommended. A Bolivian woman of childbearing age presents to an outpa- There are two trypanocidal treatments: benznidazole and tient clinic for the first time. She complains of progressive nifurtimox. Treatment is always recommended for acute and dyspnoea and palpitations. She has no clinical signs of heart congenital Chagas disease as well as for patients younger than 247 --- PAGE BREAK -- 248 enlarged cardiac silhouette. 18 years in the chronic phase. In older patients with chronic disease, treatment is controversial. Trypanocidal treatment is usually offered to patients in the indeterminate phase with mild-to-moderate organ involvement. In order to avoid vertical transmission, guidelines usually recommend treatment of women of childbearing age. The Case Continued… Both serological tests for Chagas disease came back positive. The patient was classified as having chagasic cardiomyopathy; and as she intended to become pregnant, antitrypanosomal therapy was offered. She started treatment with benznidazole 5 mg/kg per day for 60 days at the outpatient clinic. Fifteen days into treatment, she presented with a pruritic maculopapular rash ( nidazole treatment was discontinued and the patient received corticosteroids and antihistamines for 5 days which lead to complete resolution of the skin rash. Re-introduction of benznidazole was tolerated well and she was able to complete the entire 60-day course without any additional problems. Complete cardiological evaluation revealed sinus dysfunction without symptomatic bradycardia or syncope. Echocardiography showed a hypertrophic left ventricle without obstruction. Follow-up was ensured, and 5 years after, car- diac function was stable and she gave birth to a healthy child. benznidazole. --- PAGE BREAK -- There are two approved drugs for Chagas disease: benznidazole and nifurtimox. Although benznidazole is the preferred SUMMARY BOX drug for Chagas disease, about 50 % of patients receiving this treatment will present with adverse events. Hypersensitivity reactions with skin involvement are the most frequently observed Chagas Disease side effects followed by gastrointestinal disturbances, bone Chagas disease is an anthropozoonosis caused by the proto- marrow depression and peripheral neuropathy. Mild-tozoan T. cruzi. It is a neglected tropical disease endemic in 21 moderate reactions can be solved with symptomatic treatment Latin American countries with prevalence rates as high as 6.1 % with or without temporal withdrawal of trypanocidal treatment. in Bolivia. In endemic areas, it is mainly transmitted by triatomine However, in about 10 % of cases treatment discontinuation is bugs. However, in non-endemic countries mother-to-child definite. transmission, blood transfusions or transplants play a major role. Prevention relies on vector control, improving living condi Rarely, Chagas can be orally acquired by ingestion of food items tions in endemic countries, screening of blood and organs for and drinks contaminated with bug faeces. donation and screening of women of childbearing age to avoid Diagnosis in the acute phase is usually made by direct mother-to-child transmission. microscopic visualization of trypomastigotes on blood films. In the chronic phase when parasitaemia is low and intermittent, diagnosis relies on serological testing through detection of Ig G Further Reading antibodies against T. cruzi using two different tests. PCR is also used with varying sensitivities. Chagas disease has two different clinical phases. The acute 1. Franco-Parades C. American Trypanosomiasis: Chagas Disease. phase is usually asymptomatic but can present as inflammation In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed London: at the inoculation point and fever. It is followed by a chronic Elsevier; 2013 [ phase that is usually asymptomatic (indifferent phase). About 2. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Public health 30 % to 40 % of patients with chronic Chagas disease will go on guidance on screening and vaccination for infectious diseases in to develop organ involvement 10 to 20 years after initial infection. newly arrived migrants within the EU/EEA. Stockholm: ECDC; The heart is the most frequent organ involvement, predominantly 2018. affecting conduction system and myocardium. Alterations most 3. P erez-Molina JA, Molina I. Chagas disease. Lancet 2018;391 frequently seen include bundle branch blocks and segmental (10115):82–94. ventricular wall motion abnormalities that can progress to sinus 4. Norman FF, López-V elez R. Chagas Disease: comments on the node dysfunction, ventricular arrhythmias and dilated cardiomyopathy. Gastrointestinal involvement is less common and 2018 PAHO guidelines for diagnosis and management. J Trav manifestations comprise of motility disorders or megaviscera Med 2019;26(7):1–7. (megaoesophagus and megacolon). 5. Lattes R, Lasala MB. Chagas disease in the immunosuppressed patient. Clin Microbiol Infect 2014;20:200–9.