90 A 55-Year-Old Couple Both Returning from Chile and Argentina With Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome CORNELIA STAEHELIN Clinical Presentation rapidly over the 24 hours after admission, developed cardiorespiratory failure and fulfilled fast-entry criteria for extracorpo History real membrane oxygenation (ECMO). Furthermore, she experienced multi-organ failure requiring hemodialysis, and A 55-year-old Swiss couple, both fitness instructors, travelled she developed profuse bleeding from puncture sites in the confor 3 months from Ecuador to Chile. The last month of their text of disseminated intravascular coagulation. During the foltrip they spent hiking, camping and taking occasional mud lowing days, she required mass transfusions of blood products. baths in the Chile-Argentinian border region. On their flight back to Switzerland, the husband developed a fever (39°C, Clinical Findings 102.2°F), myalgias and generalized weakness that did not respond to symptomatic treatment. At presentation at the Husband: BP 90 /55 mm Hg, pulse 120 beats per minute, hospital in Switzerland 4 days later, he continued to be oxygen saturation 94 % on ambient air, and temperature febrile and felt too weak to walk to the toilet unassisted or 39°C (102.2°F). No abnormal findings on cardiopulmonary even hold up a newspaper. He developed shortness of breath auscultation. with oxygen desaturation and bilateral interstitial infiltrates Wife on admission (3 weeks after her husband’s admiswere seen on chest x-ray ( The respiratory pathogen panel from a nasopharyngeal tion, temperature 38.6°C (101.5°F). No abnormal swab (including influenza A/B, parainfluenza, RSV, adeno- findings on auscultation. virus, rhinovirus, bocavirus, coronavirus and human metapneumovirus) as well as an HIV test came back negative. The Laboratory Results following day he was transferred to the intensive care unit for non-invasive ventilator support. Husband, on admission: WCC 7.3 G/L (reference: Three weeks later, his wife presented with similar com- 3.0–10.5), 35 % band neutrophils; platelets 48 G/L (referplaints and was admitted to the same hospital. She deteriorated ence: 150–450); CRP 68 mg/L (reference: <5); glomerular 250 --- PAGE BREAK -- filtration rate >90 m L/min (reference: >90 m L/min); trans- Answer to Question 2 aminases normal. How Would You Manage These Patients Clinically? Wife, on admission: WCC 1.88 G/L; platelets 98 G/L; Is There Any Need to Consider Particular Hospital CRP 7 mg/L; glomerular filtration rate >90 m L/min; trans- Hygiene Precautions? aminases normal. Both patients should be referred to a tertiary care setting, Chest radiography at presentation was normal in both which is equipped to handle ARDS and haemorrhagic fevers. patients; however, during the course of the disease both Clinically, securing cardiorespiratory function is the main developed extensive bilateral infiltrates with pleural priority. Broad-spectrum antibiotics are indicated as empireffusions. ical treatment until further results are back. Although the aetiology is still unclear, a patient with respi Questions ratory symptoms must be treated under standard hygiene and droplet precautions (at least) to prevent potential noso 1. What is your differential diagnosis for this couple? comial transmission. Depending on local hospital hygiene 2. How would you manage these patients clinically? Is there requirements, airborne precautions may be required. any need to consider particular hospital hygiene precautions? The Case Continued… Discussion Both patients were confirmed by PCR and serology to be infected with Andesvirus (ANDV), a New World species A previously healthy Swiss couple in their mid-50 s pre- of the family Hantaviridae, belonging to the order of Bunyasent with varying degrees of cardiorespiratory failure of virales. The New World hantaviruses are the causative agent 2 and 21 days, respectively, after their return from a 3- of the Hantavirus Cardiopulmonary Syndrome (HCPS). month trip down the western coast of South America. The husband was treated with non-invasive ventilation They spent the last month travelling along the Chile- for 5 days. He made a full recovery after a month of reha Argentinian border. The cardiorespiratory collapse in bilitation. His wife experienced a dramatic course with the female patient occurs precipitously and requires nearly a full month on ECMO treatment. Multi-organ fail ECMO treatment. ure requiring renal replacement therapy and haemorrhagic complications with mass transfusions of blood products Answer to Question 1 ensued. As a result of bleeding complications at the inguinal What Is Your Differential Diagnosis for This ECMO insertion sites (compartment syndrome and leg Couple? ischemia) ECMO was replaced centrally ( additional bleeding complications at inguinal and thoracic Conditions that may present with acute respiratory distress syninsertion sites, she underwent several surgical interventions. drome (ARDS) and possible multi-organ failure after travel to Nosocomial infections followed, and she remained in South America include influenza and other respiratory viruses. intensive care for 5 months and an additional 12 months Of the viral infections, New World hantaviruses cause cardiopulin rehabilitation. The mode of transmission remained monary disease; their incubation period is comparatively long unclear; both human-to-human-transmission and acquisiand human-to-human transmission has been described, which tion from a common source were possible. could explain why husband and wife presented 3 weeks apart. Pneumococcal pneumonia should also be in the differential diagnosis as a common cause of community-acquired pneumonia worldwide. Rickettsial diseases have to be considered: of the spotted-fever group, in particular Rickettsia rickettsiae, which notoriously causes severe disease should be on the list of differentials; and scrub typhus, which was long thought to be limited to Asia, has recently been described from Chile. Pulmonary plague is also focally endemic in South America. Fungal infections (Histoplasmosis, Cryptococcosis) also have to be considered. Severe malaria may cause ARDS and is a possibility, too. Given the bleeding tendency seen in the wife, most viral haemorrhagic fevers can be excluded based on the incubation time alone, which is well below 21 days for most endemic viral haemorrhagic fevers (yellow fever, dengue and the New World arenaviruses, e. g. Junín virus and Machupo virus). There is only one exception to this rule, which is hantavirus infections: their incubation time may female patient on day 13 showing extensive and dense dorsal infiltrations be up to 35 days. and the centrally placed ECMO cannulae. --- PAGE BREAK -- 252 Nosocomial outbreaks were first reported in 1995. The incubation period in such a scenario is usually around 20 days. SUMMARY BOX Person-to-person transmission is much less common than infection by inhalation of rodent excreta and occurs through close interpersonal contacts in the hospital setting (caring for a Hantavirus Cardiopulmonary Syndrome (HCPS) person with respiratory or haemorrhagic symptoms) or at home HCPS is caused by ANDV. This New World hantavirus is (such as sexual contacts, deep kissing or sharing the same bed). endemic in the border region between Chile and Argentina. The In the nosocomial setting, standard hygiene and droplet vast majority of infections occur through inhalation of excreta precautions should be adopted, and it is recommended to treat from the long-tailed pygmy rice rat (Oligoryzomys longicauda- the patients in a single room. During aerosol-generating protus), the reservoir host. Accordingly, outdoor activities are the cedures, however, healthcare workers are advised to wear highmajor risk factor for acquiring ANDV infection. efficiency respirator masks and ocular protection. The incubation period is typically 2 to 3 weeks (range 7– 39 days) in case of common exposure. After non-specific prodromal symptoms over 2 to 8 days, the Further Reading clinical course varies from a mild disease to its most severe form, HCPS, which is characterized by microvascular leakage and is mainly attributed to host immune response. It presents with 1. Blumberg L, Enria D, Bausch DG. Viral haemorrhagic fevers. rapidly progressing respiratory failure and precipitous haemo- In: Farrar J, editor. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23 rd ed London: dynamic instability because of cardiogenic shock and consec- Elsevier; 2013 [ utive pulmonary oedema. Capillary leak leads to hypovolemia, 2. Figueiredo LT, Souza WM, Ferr es M, Enria DA. Hantaviruses and which may further impair cardiac and renal function. A hae- cardiopulmonary syndrome in South America. Virus Res morrhagic course may occur, although uncommon. 2014;187:43–54. Diagnosis is confirmed by RT-PCR from whole blood or by 3. Wells RM, Sosa Estani S, Yadon ZE, et al. An unusual Hantavirus serology, either with presence of specific Ig M antibodies or at outbreak in southern Argentina: person-to-person transmission? least a 4-fold increase in Ig G titres in paired samples. Hantavirus Pulmonary Syndrome Study Group for Patagonia. There is no specific treatment or vaccine against ANDV. The Emerg Infect Dis 1997;3:171–4. use of ribavirin and corticosteroids in ANDV infection still remains to be elucidated. Organ supportive therapy is therefore the 4. Martinez-Valdebenito C, Calvo M, Vial C, et al. Person-to-person mainstay of treatment. Patients should be transferred to a tertiary household and nosocomial transmission of Andes hantavirus, intensive care unit immediately upon suspicion of ANDV infec- southern Chile, 2011. Emerg Infect Dis 2014;20:1629–36. tion, because ECMO support might be required. Case fatality 5. Riquelme R, Rioseco ML, Bastidas L, et al. Hantavirus pulmonary rate in patients with HCPS attributable to ANDV is 20 % to 40 %. syndrome, southern Chile, 1995–2012. Emerg Infect Dis ANDV is the only hantavirus for which person-to-person 2015;21:562–8. transmission has been described, though this occurs very rarely.