A 55-year-old woman of Turkish provenance presents to a hospital in Germany with intermittent fever up to 39.5°C (103.1°F), night sweats, chest pain and fatigue. The patient had visited her relatives in Turkey several weeks before. There is a history of rheumatic fever in her childhood and mechanical mitral and aortic valve replacement at the age of 37 and 53 years, respectively (St Jude Medical prostheses).

The patient's blood pressure and heart rate are within normal limits. There are unremarkable prosthetic heart sounds and a systolic grade 1 murmur over the aortic area without radiation. Liver and spleen are not enlarged. No lymph nodes are palpable. No haemorrhages or petechiae are detectable.

There is slight anaemia (Hb 11.5 g/dL [reference >12 g/dL]). White blood cell count, lymphocyte-neutrophil ratio and platelet count are within normal limits. The C-reactive protein is 15 mg/dL (reference <0.5 mg/dL). Serum creatinine and transaminases are not elevated. Blood cultures are negative. Urinary cultures yield Enterobacteriaceae.

Chest radiography shows no infiltrates. Transthoracic echocardiography demonstrates competent prosthetic valves.
The patient is diagnosed with a urinary tract infection and treated with co-trimoxazole. Her fever settles and the patient's condition improves, but she complains of increasing dyspnoea and eventually slips into congestive heart failure.

A 55-year old Turkish woman presents with fever of unknown origin. She has travelled to Turkey shortly before and has a history of double heart valve replacement. Treatment with co-trimoxazole results in some improvement, but then the patient develops signs of congestive heart failure.

Urosepsis could have been the underlying cause of the deterioration in this patient. However, urinary tract infection is usually easily managed with a short course of early antibiotic treatment. The patient's preceding stay in Turkey should raise the suspicion of another infection not detected so far, such as brucellosis, tuberculosis or Q-fever.

With two prosthetic heart valves, our patient has an increased risk of infective endocarditis. Transoesophageal echocardiography is indicated to rule out cardiac involvement. Cultivation of blood cultures should be extended to up to 6 weeks in culture-negative endocarditis to reveal Brucella or Coxiella species.

After 4 weeks, the blood cultures taken initially grew Brucella melitensis biovar 2. Transoesophageal echocardiography revealed a large vegetation attached to the prosthetic mitral valve (Fig. 76.1). These findings led to the diagnosis of active Brucella endocarditis. Treatment with rifampicin, doxycycline and gentamicin was initiated. The patient improved rapidly. C-reactive protein returned to normal after 6 weeks of triple therapy. Two months later, however, an annular abscess cavity around the aortic prosthesis was demonstrated on echocardiography; the patient at that time was on oral rifampicin and doxycycline. Finally, she gave her consent to a third thoracotomy, for prostheses exchange. After surgery she made a complete and sustained recovery.