A 51-year-old female Swiss traveller presented to the outpatient department 6 days after returning from a 2-week holiday to Guatemala and El Salvador. Four days after her return, the patient noticed a generalized slightly pruritic maculopapular rash on the face, trunk, and extremities. There was no fever and no other accompanying symptoms. On the next day the rash worsened and a non-purulent bilateral conjunctivitis developed. The patient did not report any chronic underlying disease nor the intake of any medication.

The patient was afebrile. Upon inspection there was conjunctivitis and a generalised maculopapular rash, also involving the face. Additionally, the patient showed tender oedema of the hands, elbows, knees and feet (Fig. 77.1). There was also generalized lymphadenopathy (cervical, axillary, and inguinal).

The full blood count was normal. CRP was 8 mg/L (<5) and creatinine was very mildly elevated (87 µmol/L, range 35-80 µmol/L). Liver function tests were normal.

1. What are your differential diagnoses?
2. What diagnostic tests would you perform?

Six days after returning from a 2-week holiday to Guatemala and El Salvador, a 51-year-old female Swiss traveller presents with a slightly pruritic disseminated maculopapular rash, conjunctivitis, peripheral painful oedema (hands, elbows, knees and feet) and a generalized lymphadenopathy.

The clinical presentation is highly suggestive of an arboviral infection, which is also in line with the putative incubation period. The three most important arboviral infections in Central and South America are dengue, chikungunya and zika. Dengue is endemic throughout much of Central and South America, and it is the most frequent arboviral infection in travellers returning from the tropics. Chikungunya was absent in Central and South America until the virus was introduced in 2013. After its introduction, the virus spread to most tropical regions of the American continent. Zika was absent in Central and South America until 2015, when the virus was introduced to Brazil and caused a pandemic affecting most tropical regions of the American continent in the subsequent years.

A comparison of Dengue, Chikungunya, and Zika infections shows several clinical differences. The incubation period is 4 to 10 days for Dengue, 3 to 7 days for Chikungunya, and 3 to 12 days for Zika. The rate of asymptomatic infection is between 50 and 80 percent for Dengue, between 3 and 28 percent for Chikungunya, and approximately 80 percent for Zika. Fever and headache are very common in Dengue. Fever is also very common in Chikungunya, while headache is common. In Zika infections, fever and headache are less common. Conjunctivitis is common in Zika but not typical for Dengue or Chikungunya. Arthralgias are very common in Chikungunya, common in Dengue, and less common in Zika. Myalgias are common in Dengue but less common in both Chikungunya and Zika. A skin rash is very common in Zika, and common in both Dengue and Chikungunya. Peripheral oedema is common in Zika but not a feature of the other two infections. Haemorrhagic manifestations are common in Dengue and may sometimes be present in Chikungunya. Circulatory collapse or shock can sometimes occur with Dengue. Thrombocytopenia is common in both Dengue and Chikungunya. Lymphadenopathy is common in Dengue and Chikungunya, and less common in Zika.

Acute dengue, chikungunya, and zika infections have similar presentations and may be clinically indistinguishable. However, the presence of a skin rash, conjunctivitis and peripheral oedema in an afebrile patient is highly suggestive of a Zika virus infection (Table 77.1).

When testing for arboviral infections, the kinetics of the different test parameters have to be taken into account. During the early phase of infection, viral RNA and viral antigen (e.g. dengue specific NS1) are circulating in the blood and can be detected by RT-PCR and specific antigen assays, respectively. After some days, viraemia is fading, terminated by the host's immune response, and viral RNA and antigen become undetectable in the blood samples, while now specific IgM and IgG rise and become detectable (Fig. 77.2).

The diagnosis is made by the detection of viral RNA, viral antigen or specific IgM, or by the documentation of a ≥ four-fold rise of specific IgG antibody titres in paired (acute and convalescent) serum samples. In resource-poor countries, as well as in daily clinical practice in travel medicine, rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) for dengue (testing for NS1-Ag, IgM, and IgG) and chikungunya (testing for IgM) are widely available and often the primarily performed diagnostic tests. RDTs to diagnose Zika virus infections are under development.

In our case, RDTs for dengue and chikungunya were negative.

Because the performed RDTs for dengue and chikungunya both showed a negative result, the patient's blood samples were sent to a reference laboratory for arboviruses and our clinical suspicion of a Zika virus infection was confirmed by PCR as well as seroconversion (Table 77.2). A rise in anti-Dengue IgG was interpreted as cross-reactivity which is common among viruses of the same family.

Blood test results from a first serum sample, obtained 6 days after the onset of symptoms, and a second sample, obtained 7 days later, were analyzed. For Dengue, the Dengue IgM IIFT test was negative in both samples. The Dengue IgG IIFT test was 1:20 in the first sample and rose to 1:5120 in the second, which was interpreted as cross-reactivity. The Dengue NS1-Ag test was negative in the first sample and not performed on the second. For Chikungunya, the IgM ELISA test was negative in the first sample. The IgM IIFT and IgG IIFT tests were negative in the second sample; these tests were not performed on the first sample. The overall interpretation for Chikungunya was negative. For Zika, the IgM IIFT test was negative in the first sample but became positive with a titre of 1:640 in the second. The IgG IIFT test was 1:20 in the first sample and rose to 1:5120 in the second, indicating a positive result. The Zika RT-PCR was positive in the first sample and was not performed on the second. The overall interpretation for Zika infection was positive.

Acute dengue, chikungunya, and Zika infections have similar presentations and are often clinically indistinguishable. Although the pattern of clinical symptoms can point towards the correct diagnosis, specific molecular or immunological tests are necessary to make a final diagnosis.
Interpretation of serological test results demands some caution, because cross-reactivity of antibodies directed against viruses belonging to the same family of viruses may be misleading.
Although dengue virus NS1 antigen tests are mostly specific for dengue virus infection, serological assays may show cross-reactivity with Zika virus (ZIKV) specific antibodies (as in our case). The diagnostic value of RT-PCR for detection of Zika virus RNA in the blood is limited because viraemia is usually low and limited to the first few days after disease onset. However, Zika virus RNA detection in urine provides a feasible alternative: ZIKV is detectable with higher RNA loads and for a longer period (10-20 days after onset of symptoms) in urine samples than in serum samples.
Arboviral infections are self-limiting and, in the absence of specific treatment options, clinical management is exclusively supportive. Special features of Zika virus include its sexual transmissibility, the potential to trigger post-infectious Guillan-Barré-Syndrome, and, in the case of intrauterine infection, its ability to cause severe foetopathy (primarily microcephaly).