A 62-year-old male Thai police sergeant major from Kalasin Province in northeast Thailand presents at an urban hospital for his annual physical check-up. On abdominal ultrasonography, a solitary mass is found in the liver. He denies any clinical symptoms, there is no weight loss, no jaundice and no other gastrointestinal symptoms.

He is referred to a hospital in Khon Kaen for further investigations and treatment.

He appears in good health and vital signs are normal. Physical examination shows no jaundice. Liver and spleen are not palpable. No liver stigmata are found nor is any lymphadenopathy detected.

His laboratory results are shown. The patient's laboratory results for AST, ALT, ALP, total bilirubin, and direct bilirubin were all within their respective normal reference ranges, with values of 26 U/L, 32 U/L, 84 U/L, 0.6 mg/dL, and 0.2 mg/dL. Tests for HBsAg, HBeAg, and Anti-HCV were negative. The Anti-HBs level was elevated at 24.13 IU/L, compared to a normal range of 0.0-10.0, and the Anti-HBc test was positive. The AFP tumor marker was within the normal range at 2.8 U/mL, but the CEA level was elevated at 18.96 µg/L against a normal range of 0.0-2.5, and the CA19-9 level was markedly high at 342.80 U/mL, with a normal range of 0.0-37.0.

Abdominal MRI reveals a single solid liver mass in the right liver lobe (segments VI/VII).

1. What is your differential diagnosis?
2. What additional information should you obtain from the patient?

A 62-year-old asymptomatic Thai man undergoes his annual physical check-up. Ultrasound incidentally detects a solitary liver mass. Liver function tests are normal, and Hepatitis B serology suggests previous infection. The CA19-9 level is markedly elevated.

The most important differential diagnoses in this Thai man in his sixties are hepatocellular carcinoma, cholangiocarcinoma (CCA), a metastatic tumour and some infections, including tuberculosis.

In an otherwise asymptomatic patient with a high serum CA19-9 level without a history and signs of chronic viral hepatitis, CCA is the most likely diagnosis. Metastatic cancer should be considered and thorough investigation is required to detect the primary site of the tumour.

Kalasin, where the patient comes from, is a province in northeast Thailand. Given his region of origin it is important to ask for a history of eating raw or undercooked freshwater fish, which frequently contains metacercariae of the liver fluke, Opisthorchis viverrini.

Traditional food containing undercooked freshwater fish is usually eaten among the villagers in the region including their children. Exposure to the fluke early in life is an impor­tant risk factor for the development of CCA. Liver fluke infection is easily treated with praziquantel; however, re-infection is common in an area where traditional food is regularly consumed.

The patient was admitted to the hospital and underwent hemihepatectomy. A large tumour (9 × 9 cm) of whitish­yellowish colour was found in the right liver lobe. In addi­tion, liver flukes were detected in the adjacent bile duct. The liver parenchyma itself appeared non-cirrhotic.

Histology confirmed intrahepatic CCA and the patient was started on postoperative chemotherapy. Additional past medical history taken after surgery revealed that he had a history of liver fluke infection and praziquantel treatment in the past 10 years at the local primary care unit.

CCA is strongly associated with chronic liver fluke infection. O. viverrini and Clonorchis sinensis are therefore classified by WHO as biological carcinogens.

The Greater Mekong subregion has the highest reported incidence of liver fluke-associated CCA in the world. It is also endemic in East Asia (southern China, Korea, northern Vietnam) because of C. sinensis infection, and in Kazakhstan, Siberia, other parts of Russia and various European countries, where O. felineus is the major parasite.

The infection is acquired by eating raw freshwater fish and uncooked fermented fish containing metacercariae of the parasites. Adult worms live in the small intrahepatic bile ducts of their definitive host, which includes humans, cats, dogs and other mammals. They can live in the bile duct for over 20 years and re­infection may occur. Prevalence and intensity of infection increase with age.

Chronic infection may lead to periductal fibrosis, cholecystitis and gallstones. Mutagenesis is thought to be triggered by chronic mechanical and chemical irritation as well as immunological fac­tors. Besides the infection itself, cultural and lifestyle factors have recently been found to be relevant risk factors for CCA; among others, a combination of alcohol use and smoking.

The complex interaction of risk factors besides fluke infection may explain why despite the widespread availability of prazi­quantel and massive control efforts, CCA remains a major health problem in endemic regions in Asia.

CCA may long be asymptomatic, as shown in this case. Screening and early detection of CCA is crucial but challenging.

In Thailand, a comprehensive approach to prevention and control of liver fluke infection has been implemented under the “Cholangiocarcinoma Screening and Care Program” (CASCAP). Also, EcoHealth-based integrated control programmes such as the “Lawa model” have been successfully propagated at the community level. The “Lawa model” (referring to the fluke endemic Lawa lake region in Thailand) is a programme which includes treatment with anthelmintic drugs, intensive health education methods, ecosystem monitoring and active commu­nity participation.