A 67-year-old German woman who has lived as an expatriate in Cameroon for the past 4 years presents with palpitations at a tropical medicine clinic in Germany. She also reports transient subcutaneous swellings for the past year. There is no history of fever or constitutional symptoms and the past medical history is otherwise unremarkable.
24-hour ECG recording was done elsewhere, which showed paroxysmal supraventricular extrasystoles. Echocardiography revealed a minimal pericardial effusion.

Vital signs are normal and the patient is afebrile. There are no visible subcutaneous swellings. Heart sounds are clear and regular, and there are no murmurs. No pathological findings are noted on physical examination.

Full blood count results are shown in Table 28.1.

The patient's full blood count showed a white blood cell count of 6.20 x 10^9/L, within the reference range of 4-10. Haemoglobin was 13.8 g/dL, within the 12-15 g/dL range. The platelet count was 155 x 10^9/L, within the reference of 150-450. In the differential count, neutrophils were 45%, lymphocytes were 36%, band neutrophils were 1%, monocytes were 4%, and basophils were 0%, all within their respective reference ranges of 20-50%, 20-40%, 0-5%, 0-10%, and 0-2%. Notably, eosinophils were elevated at 14%, which is above the 0-6% reference range, and the absolute eosinophil count was 0.868 x 10^9/L, exceeding the reference value of less than 0.45.

The chest radiograph does not show any abnormalities.

A 67-year-old expatriate living in Cameroon for 4 years presents with eosinophilia and reports transient subcutaneous swellings. Additionally, the patient suffers from cardiac arrhythmia.

The pattern of transient subcutaneous swellings, eosinophilia and the history of living in Cameroon for several years are the key pieces of clinical information suggestive of a filarial infection.

Some filarial infections may affect the heart, and chronic eosinophilia is known to be cardiotoxic and may cause endomyocardial fibrosis. The cardiac findings in this patient, however, may warrant further work-up.

The differentials of skin swellings and eosinophilia include non-specific urticaria, Calabar swellings in loiasis, cysticerco-sis, larva currens in Strongyloides stercoralis infection and infection with Mansonella perstans.
Acute schistosomiasis (Katayama syndrome) may present with eosinophilia, fever and an urticarial rash; however, this patient is afebrile and the migratory swellings she describes do not fit the clinical picture of schistosomiasis.
Gnathostomiasis and sparganosis may also cause eosinophilia and migratory swellings; however, these infections are more common in East Asia than in Africa. Sparganosis has been reported from Kenya and Tanzania and gnathostomiasis occurs in the Okavango Delta, Botswana.

Serology for filarial infections was positive. Day-blood samples were collected, filtered and stained with Giemsa, which revealed sheathed microfilariae with a tapered tail characteristic for Loa loa. In contrast, microfilariae of M. perstans, another filarial nematode endemic in West and Central Africa, which may cause similar symptoms, would have been smaller and unsheathed with a blunt tail. The microfilarial count was 1400/mL.
Despite the low microfilarial count the patient was treated with caution, first with albendazole followed by ivermectin. Therapy was tolerated well. The absolute eosinophil count (AEC) returned to normal and the microfilarial count declined. No sequelae were observed and the palpitations settled.
Follow-up echocardiography 3 months later was normal, the pericardial effusion had resolved and 24-hour ECG was also normal.
Loiasis and other conditions causing high eosinophil counts have been implicated in the development of endomyocardial fibrosis; however, it remains unclear in this case whether there was any association between the infection and the patient's transient cardiac problems.

Treatment of loiasis is matched to the level of microfilaraemia. For high levels, over 8000 microfilariae per milliliter, the recommended regimen is albendazole 200mg twice daily for 21 days, followed by ivermectin 150µg/kg once, and then diethylcarbamazine (DEC) at slowly increasing doses. For moderate levels, between 2000 and 8000 microfilariae per milliliter, the recommendation is ivermectin 150µg/kg once, which should be repeated after 1 to 3 months until microfilaraemia falls below 2000 per milliliter, followed by treatment with DEC. For low levels, less than 2000 microfilariae per milliliter, treatment with DEC is advised. This should start with low doses of 3-6 mg per day if parasites are in the blood, or 50 mg per day if amicrofilaraemic, divided into 2-3 doses. The dose is then doubled daily up to 400 mg per day, also divided into 2-3 doses. This treatment should be initiated in a hospital setting. To mitigate side effects such as arthralgias, pruritus, headache, and fever during the first days of treatment, oral antihistamines or corticosteroids can be useful. Achieving a complete cure may necessitate several 3- to 4-week courses of DEC, administered at intervals of 2 to 3 weeks.