A 53-year-old Malawian man presents to a local hospital with a productive cough and whitish sputum for 3 months. He also reports night sweats and some weight loss, which he is unable to quantify.
Two months earlier he presented to a health centre with the same complaints. He was given presumptive antimalar- ials and amoxicillin for 5 days, but to no avail.
The patient is not aware of any tuberculosis (TB) con- tacts. He is currently not on any medication and his past medical history is unremarkable. He is a subsistence farmer. He has never worked in a mine or in the construction indus- try. He is a non-smoker. He is married with five children; all are well.

53-year-old man, slightly wasted. Temperature 38.8°C (101.8°F), blood pressure 100/80 mmHg, pulse 88bpm, oxygen saturation 97% on ambient air. He appears mildly anaemic. On inspection of his mouth there is no oral thrush, no Kaposi's sarcoma and no oral hairy leukoplakia. His chest is clear and there are normal heart sounds without any mur- murs. There is no lymphadenopathy; liver and spleen are not enlarged.

The HIV-test is reactive. His further laboratory results are shown in Table 33.1.

On admission, the patient's laboratory results showed a white blood cell count of 3.2 x10⁹/L, which was below the reference range of 4-10. His haemoglobin was 9.8 g/dL, also below the reference range of 13-15. The mean corpuscular volume was 90 fL and the platelet count was 305 x10⁹/L, both of which were within their normal reference ranges of 80-98 and 150-350, respectively. The CD4 count was 54 cells/µL, significantly below the reference of 500-1200. Two sputum tests for AFB were negative. Both the Malaria RDT and the thick smear for Plasmodium spp. were also negative.

His chest radiograph on admission shows a prominent hilar region bilaterally but is otherwise normal (Fig. 33.1).

A 53-year-old Malawian man presents with chronic cough and constitutional symptoms. A course of oral antibiotics did not yield any improvement. The patient is not aware of any TB contacts. On admission he is newly diagnosed with HIV-infection and advanced immunosuppression. His sputum microscopy is negative for acid-fast bacilli (AFB). Chest radiography shows a prominent hilar region but is otherwise normal.

In all HIV-positive patients with cough and weight loss who do not respond to antibiotic therapy, tuberculosis is top of the list of differential diagnoses. In this case the most likely diagnosis is smear-negative pulmonary TB.
TB in patients with advanced immunosuppression often presents with a clinical picture that is very different from immunocompetent individuals: sputum smear-negative TB, which is uncommon in HIV-negative patients, is com- monly seen in HIV-infected patients, particularly if immu- nosuppression is advanced as in this case. The slightly prominent hilar region seen on the patient's chest radiograph is compatible with the intrathoracic lymphadenopathy: typ- ical though not specific for TB. Physical examination of the chest is normal in about half of HIV patients with pulmonary TB.
The fact that the patient does not report any TB contact should not be overvalued. Firstly, TB in immunosuppression is often a consequence of reactivation and the primary infec- tion may have been decades ago. Secondly, in resource-limited countries, practically everyone is exposed to TB – this could occur during a ride on an overcrowded minibus or when con- gregating with friends and family in someone's small home.
Given the fact that our patient is in an advanced stage of immunosuppression and has not taken any co-trimoxazole prophylaxis, an alternative or possibly co-existing diagnosis to consider is Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia (PCP). A concomitant bacterial chest infection is possible but unlikely to explain the whole 3 months of illness.
Kaposi's sarcoma (KS) of the lung is another differential diagnosis to consider, but patients with pulmonary KS usu- ally have manifestations of KS elsewhere (skin, oral mucosa). On chest radiography of patients with pulmonary KS, patchy infiltrations are commonly seen in the lower lung zones. Nei- ther was the case in our patient, which makes this diagnosis unlikely.
Pulmonary malignancy or pulmonary sarcoidosis, which would be high on the list of differential diagnoses in indus- trialized countries, are much less likely than an infectious cause in the given setting.
Apart from chest infections, Gram-negative sepsis second- ary to invasive non-typhoidal Salmonellae (iNTS) needs to be considered in this febrile and anaemic patient with advanced immunosuppression.

Induced sputum should be examined for acid-fast bacilli. Real-time PCR-based tests such as XPert MTB/RIF are easy to use, more sensitive than microscopy and also help detect rifampicin resistance. Thanks to an endorsement by WHO and international donor support, XPert MTB/ RIF is increasingly available even at remote hospitals in rural areas.
Mycobacterial cultures of the sputum should be done but results will take several weeks, too long to guide the clini- cian's imminent decision.
Ideally, bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage should be done and material assessed for M. tuberculosis (PCR, cul- ture, microscopy) and Pneumocystis jirovecii (PCR, micros- copy). Pulmonary Kaposi's sarcoma could also be diagnosed on endoscopy.
Urine lipoarabinomannan (urine-LAM) is a simple lateral-flow assay helpful to look for TB in patients with advanced immunosuppression (CD4 <100/µl). A positive test indicates disseminated TB with renal involvement.
Ultrasound is also very useful and simple to look for signs of extrapulmonary/disseminated TB in patients with advanced immunosuppression. Simple and very useful algo- rithms have been published to guide clinicians not ultrasound-experienced in the diagnosis of TB.
If none of these investigations is available, it is well justi- fiable to empirically start the patient on antituberculous treatment, because sputum smear-negative TB is common and fatal if untreated. Adding prednisolone for the first 4 weeks of antituberculous treatment has been shown to reduce the incidence of immune-reconstitution inflamma- tory syndrome (IRIS).
Additional antibiotic treatment should be considered in this febrile patient with advanced immunosuppression. If available, blood cultures should be taken in any febrile patient before starting antibiotic treatment. Also, adding high-dose co-trimoxazole to antituberculous therapy as pre- sumptive treatment for PCP has to be considered if the patient does not clinically improve. The optimal timing to initiate antiretroviral therapy (ART) is within the first 8 weeks of starting antituberculous treatment and within the first 2 weeks for patients who have CD4 cell counts <50 cells/µl.

Induced sputum results came back negative for AFB and there was no sputum PCR available. The patient's exercise test (walking down the hospital corridor three times at a fast pace) showed oxygen saturation of 98% as opposed to 97% at rest, and was therefore negative.

The patient was treated for a possible bacterial chest infec- tion, covering also for Gram-negative bacteria. He received ceftriaxone 2g IV od and erythromycin 500mg qid for 5 days. It was decided not to treat him for PCP and he received the prophylactic dose of co-trimoxazole (480 mg bid according to local national guidelines). Nonetheless, his fever persisted, even though the cough subjectively improved slightly.
On day 7 in the hospital, the patient was started on empir- ical treatment for smear-negative TB with four antitubercu- lous drugs (Isoniazid (H), Rifampicin (R), Pyrazinamide (P) and Ethambutol (E)). After the first week of treatment, he started to feel better. His fever went down and the cough gradually settled. He was discharged home. Three weeks into the TB treatment he was seen at the HIV clinic. He was doing well and had started antiretroviral therapy.

Cavitating smear-positive pulmonary TB, as seen classically in HIV-negative individuals, is uncommon in advanced immuno- suppression. Instead, patients more commonly present with sputum smear-negative pulmonary TB. CXR may be completely normal and clinical symptoms are often discrete; patients may produce little sputum and haemoptysis is rare.
HIV-positive individuals are also more likely to present with extrapulmonary TB manifesting as pleural effusion, pericardial disease, lymph node TB, abdominal TB, TB meningitis and miliary disease or a combination of these (Fig. 33.2). Severe anaemia is a common clinical clue to a co-infection with HIV/TB and reflects bone marrow involvement.
When treating HIV/TB co-infected patients, pharmacokinetic interactions between rifampicin and antiretroviral drugs have to be considered. Adding prednisolone during the first 4 weeks of antituberculous treatment may help decrease the risk of immune- reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS).

TB and HIV infection are the most important 'tropical' diseases in adults in many parts of sub-Saharan Africa. Co-infection with HIV and TB is common and poses a particular challenge to the clinician.
Clinical presentation of TB changes with declining peripheral CD4 counts (Table 33.2).

In patients who are HIV-negative or have a high CD4 count over 200/μL, TB presentation includes a severe, productive cough, and haemoptysis is common. In contrast, for patients with a low CD4 count below 200/μL, the cough is often mild with small amounts of whitish sputum, and haemoptysis is rare. Regarding chest radiography, patients with a high CD4 count typically show cavities, upper lobe infiltrates, and destruction, whereas patients with a low CD4 count have no cavities and may present with infiltrates, hilar lymphadenopathy, a miliary pattern, or a completely normal radiograph. The sputum smear result is often positive in high CD4 count patients but often negative in those with a low count. Extrapulmonary and disseminated TB occurs in less than 20% of TB cases in patients with high CD4 counts but is common in about 50% of cases in patients with low CD4 counts.