A 45-year-old Sri Lankan man presents to a local hospital with fever, chills, headache, body aches and severe right hypochondrial pain for the past week. He has also developed a dry cough during the past few days. He has vomited twice during his illness and has lost his appetite.

His abdominal pain is constant and dull. It radiates to the right shoulder and is made worse when coughing and resting on the right side.

The patient had been well before the current illness. He admits to consuming locally brewed alcohol (‘toddy', made of coconut flowers) daily for the past 10 to 15 years.

The patient looks generally ill, mildly dehydrated and is in pain. Temperature is 38.3°C (100.8°F), blood pressure 100/80 mmHg, pulse 102bpm, respiratory rate 24 breath cycles per minute. There is no jaundice, no pallor and no lymphadenopathy. The abdominal examination reveals a tender hepatomegaly; however, the tenderness is most prominent over the 6th to 9th intercostal spaces in the right mid-axillary line. The spleen is not enlarged. On auscultation, there are few inspiratory crackles over the right lung base. The cardiovascular system and the nervous system are clinically normal.

A chest radiograph showed elevated right hemidiaphragm and patchy shadows in the right lower zone.

At presentation, the patient's laboratory results showed a high white blood cell count of 14.7 x 10⁹/L, which is above the reference range of 4-10. His haemoglobin was 12.3 g/dL and platelet count was 224 x 10⁹/L, both within normal reference ranges. Liver function tests revealed elevated levels of AST at 54 U/L, ALT at 38 U/L, and ALP at 446 U/L, all above their respective reference ranges. His total serum bilirubin was normal at 10.3 µmol/L, while direct serum bilirubin was low at 1.5 µmol/L. Renal function markers showed elevated blood urea nitrogen at 7 mmol/L and serum creatinine at 124 µmol/L. The C-reactive protein level was significantly elevated at 48 mg/L, whereas the reference is less than 6.

A 45-year-old Sri Lankan man presents with fever, headache, body aches and constant right-sided abdominal pain for a week. He also has a dry cough. His past medical history is unremarkable, but he consumes local alcohol. He is febrile with tender hepatomegaly and intercostal tenderness on the right. There is no jaundice.

His blood results show very mildly elevated transaminases, an elevated alkaline phosphatase (AP) and raised inflammatory markers.

Tender hepatomegaly, intercostal tenderness and an elevated right hemidiaphragm in the context of fever point towards an infectious focus in the liver.

His transaminases are only slightly elevated; AST is higher than ALT, which could be explained merely by his regular alcohol consumption. In infectious hepatitis one would expect higher transaminase levels and clinical jaundice.

The most likely diagnosis in this man is a liver abscess, which could be amoebic or pyogenic. Given the Asian setting, hyermucoviscous serotypes of Klebisella pneumoniae have to be considered which have been increasingly detected in South and South East Asia since around 1990 and also seem to be spreading to countries outside Asia. Given the epidemiological setting, the relatively young age of the patient and the absence of comorbidities such as diabetes or biliary disease, an amoebic liver abscess is more likely. Also, the alcoholic drink the patient consumes is locally known to be linked with amoebiasis. The precise mechanisms are still under discussion; it is assumed that the parasites contaminate the clay containers used to collect toddy, but additional factors may play a role as well.

Another tropical infectious disease to consider in a febrile patient from Asia with any kind of organ abscess is melioidosis. Melioidosis, caused by the environmental bacterium Burkholderia pseudomallei, can also present with pulmonary infiltrates and cavities similar to TB, as septic arthritis, with skin manifestations and with cerebral involvement. Cases of melioidosis have been increasingly reported from Sri Lanka. The majority of cases occur in the immunocompromised, especially with type 2 diabetes mellitus, but also alcoholism, chronic lung disease, chronic renal disease, steroid use, immunosuppressive therapy and cancer.

Melioidosis is also endemic in other parts of Asia, such as India, Thailand, Lao PR, Vietnam and in northern Australia, sporadic cases are seen all over the tropics.

An ultrasound of the liver should be done. Entamoeba histolytica serology is highly sensitive and useful as a screening test; however, it may lack specificity in individuals from highly endemic tropical regions like the Indian subcontinent. Recently, multiplex PCR testing on aspirated fluid has been identified as a rapid and robust diagnosis of amoebic liver abscess in patients with cystic focal liver lesions. Stool microscopy for E. histolytica trophozoites may be attempted but is less than 50% sensitive.

The ultrasound scan of his abdomen revealed a solitary hypoechoic lesion with an irregular wall measuring 7×6cm in the right liver lobe. There was a small pleural effusion on the right.

Because of its large size, the lesion was aspirated under ultrasound guidance, yielding brownish pus highly suspicious of an amoebic liver abscess.

For the treatment of amoebic liver abscesses, tissue agents include Metronidazole, given at a dose of 500-750 mg intravenously or orally three times a day for 7-10 days. Alternatively, Tinidazole can be used at 2 g orally once a day for 3-5 days, Ornidazole at 0.5 g intravenously twice a day for 3-6 days, or Nitazoxanide at 500 mg orally twice a day for 3 days. Following this, luminal agents are used. Options include Paromomycin at a dose of 8-10 mg/kg orally three times a day for 7 days, Diloxanide Furoate at 500 mg orally three times a day for 10 days, or Iodoquinole at 650 mg orally three times a day after meals for 20 days.

The patient was treated with metronidazole for ten days and made a rapid and uneventful recovery.

Amoebic liver abscess (ALA) is the most common extraintestinal form of invasive amoebiasis caused by Entamoeba histolytica. The infection occurs worldwide but is most common in tropical areas with overcrowding and poor sanitation. Rates of ALA are 3 to 20 times higher in men between 18 and 50 years of age than in other populations; the reasons for this are poorly understood but hormonal factors are being discussed, as well as alcohol consumption. Humans acquire the infection by ingestion of faecally contaminated food or water. Trophozoites of E. histolytica may penetrate the intestinal wall and haematogenously spread to the liver. Clinical manifestations include fever with chills, right hypochondrial pain, anorexia and weight loss, but most patients with ALA do not have a history of recent dysentery. A dry cough and fine crepitations over the right lung bases are common. Jaundice is unusual. Localized intercostal tenderness helps in the clinical diagnosis. ALA may rupture into the peritoneal cavity or through the skin or diaphragm. Haematogenous spread may cause metastatic abscesses in distant organs such as the brain.

Leukocytosis, raised inflammatory parameters and an elevated alkaline phosphatase are the most common non-specific laboratory findings. Diagnosis is usually made by a combination of imaging studies and serology. Abdominal ultrasound scan is the most suitable imaging technique in resource-limited settings, but CT and MRI scans are also highly sensitive. None of the imaging techniques is specific for ALA. Plain radiography of the thorax may reveal elevation of the right hemidiaphragm.

Serology is highly sensitive but may lack specificity in individuals from endemic countries. Although aspiration of a suspected ALA is not a routine investigation, aspirated fluid can be tested with multiplex PCR testing for the rapid and robust diagnosis of amoebiasis in patients with cystic focal liver lesions. The aspirated fluid is thick, odourless and brownish in colour; it is bacteriologically sterile and amoebic trophozoites are not usually detectable in the aspirate. The term 'abscess' is a misnomer, as the 'pus' is in fact necrotic liver.

Most patients rapidly respond to antibiotic treatment with metronidazole or tinidazole.

Metronidazole 500 to 750 mg tds PO or IV should be given for 7 to 10 days, tinidazole 2 g per day PO for 3 to 5 days. This should be followed by a luminal amoebicide, such as paromomycin, diloxanide furoate, or iodoquinol.

The role of therapeutic percutaneous aspiration or drainage is still controversial. It may be useful in large abscesses, especially when located in the left liver lobe with high risk for rupturing into the pericardium, and in ALA that do not respond to nitroimidazole therapy within 72 hours when pyogenic infection is a concern. Lesions may take a long time to decrease in size, therefore short-term, follow-up imaging has to be interpreted with caution.