A 40-year-old Thai woman presents to an outpatient clinic in Germany with a history of severe headache for the past 8 days. The headache was of gradual onset and did not respond to any painkillers. There is no fever and no chills. She denies any visual problems, any weakness of her limbs or memory problems.
Ten days earlier she had returned from a 4-week jour-
ney to north-east Thailand, where she visited friends and relatives. During her visit she ate traditional regional dishes, including freshwater fish, seafood, snails and frogs. She reports that her brother-in-law, with whom she had shared several traditional meals, has also fallen ill with a severe headache.
She presented to a municipal hospital 3 days earlier. A CT scan of her brain was performed and reported to be normal. Her blood count was also normal. A differential white cell count has not been done.
Her past medical history is unremarkable. The patient is married, she is a housewife and has lived in Germany for the past 13 years.

On examination, she is afebrile, her neck is supple and Lasè-gue's sign (straight leg raise) is negative. Pupils are equal, round and react to light and accommodation, and there are no cranial nerve palsies. The remainder of the neuro-logical examination, including the assessment of higher cortical functions such as language, memory and praxia, is unremarkable. There is no rash, no oral thrush and there are no subcutaneous swellings. Cardiopulmonary examina-tion is normal. Liver and spleen are not enlarged, and there is no lymphadenopathy.

Her laboratory results at presentation in the clinic are shown in Table 64.1.

A 40-year-old Thai woman presents with a history of severe intractable headache after a stay in north-east Thailand where she enjoyed traditional regional dishes. Her brother-in-law in Thailand is suffering from the same severe headache.

The patient's white blood cell count was 12.3 x 10⁹/L, which is above the reference range of 4-10. Her eosinophil count was significantly elevated at 2.34 x 10⁹/L, compared to a reference value of less than 0.5. The haemoglobin level was 11.7 mg/dL, slightly below the 12-14 reference range, and the mean corpuscular volume was low at 70 fL against a reference of 83-103. Platelets were normal at 330 x 10⁹/L, within the reference range of 150-350. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate was elevated at 20 mm/h, where the reference is less than 10. The IgE level was markedly high at 944 U/mL, far exceeding the reference of less than 100. Creatinine was normal at 62 µmol/L, below the reference of 80. ALT was 28 U/L and GGT was 35 U/L, both within their normal ranges of less than 30 and less than 40 respectively. The C-reactive protein level was less than 5 mg/L, which is normal.

On examination, she is afebrile with no meningism and no focal neurological deficits. Her blood results reveal peripheral eosinophilia and elevated IgE levels. A CT scan of her brain done elsewhere showed no abnormalities.

The most likely diagnosis is a food-borne parasitic infection of the meninges. The key points from the history which sup-port a food-borne infection are: (1) temporal relationship with travelling to north-east Thailand, where food-borne nematodes are prevalent; (2) consumption of traditional Thai food, including raw or undercooked freshwater fish, seafood, snails and frogs; and (3) the occurrence of similar symptoms in a relative who participated in the same meals (cluster).
Headache is a typical symptom of meningitis, therefore infestation of the meninges is very likely. The diagnosis of a parasitosis is strongly supported by the presence of consid-erable blood eosinophilia and elevated IgE levels in serum.

Parasitic infection of the meninges typically results in eosin-ophilic meningitis. The next investigation to perform is a lumbar puncture to confirm meningitis and to look for a pos-sibly eosinophilic profile of inflammation. Eosinophilic meningitis in an otherwise healthy person with positive his-tory of exposure to helminths and features of an outbreak is almost always attributable to a parasitic infestation.
The main differential diagnoses are fungal meningitis with Coccidioides immitis (in North and Central America), lymphoma, eosinophilic leukaemia, sarcoid and idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome.
It is important to measure the CSF opening pressure. If it is elevated, serial spinal taps might relieve the symptoms.

A lumbar puncture was performed. The cerebrospinal fluid showed 1877 leukocytes/µL (reference value <5), with 42% eosinophils, 39% lymphocytes, 18% monocytes and 1% neutrophils. CSF protein levels were elevated at 1.59 g/L (reference value <0.45), glucose was 1.85 mmol/L (reference range: 2.2-3.9).
On microscopic examination of the CSF, no larvae could be detected. Ziehl-Neelsen stain as well as cryptococcal antigen were negative. There were no suspected malignant cells. CSF culture did not yield any bacterial or fungal growth. Urine and stool microscopy did not show any ova of Schistosoma species. Taenia solium serology was negative, as were Fasciola hepatica and Paragonimus serologies. Toxo-cara canis serology was weakly positive but did not show any change of titre on follow-up. HIV serology was negative.
The initial CSF opening pressure was elevated, at 34 cmH2O (reference range 12-20). Lumbar puncture relieved the patient's headache and was therefore repeated twice, whereupon the patient felt markedly better. No further specific treatment was prescribed. She received iron tablets for a mild microcytic anaemia. The patient was discharged significantly improved after a 1-week hospital stay. After her discharge, serology results came back and Western Blot showed specific antibodies against 31kD Angiostrongylus cantonensis antigen. Since the patient hat no symptoms any more no further treatment was prescribed. At 4-week follow-up she had fully recovered and her peripheral eosino-phil count had returned to normal.

Eosinophilic meningitis is defined as the presence of ten or more eosinophils per microlitre of CSF, or eosinophilia of at least 10% of the total CSF leukocyte count. Invasion of the central nervous system by the food-borne nematodes Angiostrongylus cantonensis, and less frequently, Gnathos-toma spinigerum, are the most common causes.

One main cause of parasitic eosinophilic meningitis is Angiostrongylus cantonensis, which has an incubation period of 2 to 35 days. Infection is sourced from the consumption of infected crustaceans, snails, prawns, crabs, frogs, or contaminated vegetables, and it is found geographically in South-east Asia, the Pacific basin, Australia, and the Caribbean. Its clinical features include paraesthesia of the trunk, limbs, or face, and serology involves a Western blot of antibodies against the 31 kD antigen. Another cause is Gnathostoma spinigerum, with an incubation period ranging from days to months. The source of infection is the consumption of infected poultry or fish, snakes, or frogs. It is found in South-east Asia, particularly Thailand, and is emerging in sub-Saharan Africa. Clinical features include migrating subcutaneous swellings, creeping eruption, and sharp radicular pain at the onset. Serology for this pathogen uses a Western blot of antibodies against the 24 kD antigen. For both pathogens, serology can be negative in the acute state, and a paired convalescence sample should be taken after 4 weeks.

Rarely, neurocysticercosis, neuroschistosomiasis, paragoni-miasis, fascioliasis, toxocariasis, baylisascariasis and trichinel-losis can be associated with eosinophilic meningitis; however, the meningeal involvement is usually not prominent.
Angiostrongylus cantonensis, the rat lungworm, is the most common infectious cause of eosinophilic meningitis. Humans are infected by ingestion of Angiostrongylus larvae in interme-diate hosts such as fresh water snails and slugs; or transport (paratenic) hosts, such as prawns, crabs and frogs; or salad and vegetables contaminated with slime of infected snails. Once ingested, the third stage larvae (L3) penetrate the intes-tinal wall, reach the portal vein and from there enter the systemic circulation. A. cantonensis is a truly neurotropic hel-minth. Humans are dead-end hosts, the larvae die in the human subarachnoid space, causing an eosinophilic inflammatory response.
To date, no standard of care treatment regimen for CNS angiostrongyliasis exists. Mild cases may be managed symp-tomatically with serial lumbar punctures and analgesics. More severe cases may be treated with corticosteroids alone or in combination with anthelmintic drugs. Corticosteroids (eg prednisolone 1 mg/kg/day) reduce the duration and intensity of headache. The use of antiparasitic drugs (eg albendazole) is controversial and the benefit of antipararasitic treatment compared to steroid use alone is marginal. If anti-parasitic drugs are administered, they should be given with steroid cover.