An oedematous, HIV-negative 4-year-old boy from rural Mozambique is seen at the paediatric department of a central hospital in Malawi.
He was admitted 5 days earlier with the suspected diagnosis of nephrotic syndrome and was started on furosemide and prednisolone; however, his oedema did not subside.
Three weeks earlier he had been treated for pneumonia at a health centre.

The little boy is miserable, refusing to eat and apathetic with a puffy face and pitting oedema on the lower legs. His hair is brittle, sparse and fair in colour. The skin is dry and hyperpigmented; it is peeling off like 'flaky paint' and there are ulcerative skin lesions, most prominently in the groins.

The patient's albumin was 2.2 g/dL, below the reference range of 3.0–5.2 g/dL, and his haemoglobin was 7 g/dL, below the reference range of 12-14g/dL.

1. What is the likely diagnosis and how can it be distinguished from nephrotic syndrome?
2. How should the child be treated and what is the prognosis?

Three weeks after a severe bacterial infection, a 4-year old boy from rural Mozambique develops oedema. The skin is hyperpigmented and dry, peeling off and there is discoloration of his hair. Treatment with furosemide has no influence on the extent of the oedema. Clinically, the little boy is sick and refusing to eat or drink. He is anaemic and his serum albumin is low.

Generalized oedema in a child can have various causes. In nephrotic syndrome, serum albumin is low and there is heavy proteinuria. Low serum albumin is however influenced by many factors such as nutrition, liver function and intestinal resorption.
This child is displaying additional clinical features such as skin and hair changes as well as apathy. These are typical features of kwashiorkor, a form of severe acute malnutrition.
A urine dipstick test should be done to check for protein. In nephrotic syndrome, proteinuria exceeds 3.5 g per day (4 + on a urine dipstick) and the urine is often macroscopically frothy. In kwashiorkor, some proteinuria may be found but rarely exceeds 1 + on a dipstick test.

The child needs to be admitted to the high dependency area of the nutrition ward and treated according to WHO guidelines for severe acute malnutrition with meticulously calculated amounts of feeds and close monitoring. The risks of infection, diarrhoea, anaemia, cardiac and liver failure are high. Prophylactic antibiotics, monitoring of temperature and haemoglobin as well as careful fluid replacement, are part of the treatment scheme.

The skin in the groin and armpits continued to peel off and became superinfected. The lesions could successfully be treated with Gentian violet solution.
Initially the child did not tolerate 3-hourly feeds and required feeding through a nasogastric tube. On day 5 in the nutrition rehabilitation unit he could eat by himself and the oedema started to settle. The transition to higher caloric feeds was tolerated well and he could be discharged into the community feeding program at day 15.